The Art of
Intercession
Handbook on How To Intercede

Acknowledgment
Reverend Wilford H. Reidt of Kennewick, Washington,
is an outstanding Bible teacher. Wilford's wife, Gertrude,
is the daughter of John G. Lake, well-known apostle of
faith in the early days of this century. Both Wilford and
Gertrude are long-time intercessors, greatly used by God
in this special ministry.
Wilford's teachings on the subject reveal a depth of
knowledge only a real intercessor of some years' standing
could teach. I was so impressed with his study outline and
comments on the subject of intercession that I asked his
permission to use it in this book to the glory of God. For we
believe that God will use this book to raise up and train a
great group of intercessors who will be at the forefront of
the work of the Lord in these last days. Brother Reidt gave
us permission and his remarks are set out in recognizable
type.

BOOKS BY KENNETH E. HAGIN
Redeemed From Poverty . . . Sickness . . . Death
What Faith Is
Seven Vital Steps To Receiving The Holy Spirit
Right and Wrong Thinking
Prayer Secrets
Authority of the Believer
How Tb Turn Your Faith Loose
The Key To Scriptural Healing
The Ministry of a Prophet
The Origin and Operation of Demons
Demons and How to Deal With Them
Ministering to the Oppressed
Praying to Get Results
The Present Day Ministry of Jesus Christ
The Gift of Prophecy
Healing Belongs to Us
The Real Faith
The Interceding Christian
How You Can Know The Will of God
Man on Three Dimensions
The Human Spirit
El Shaddai
Faith Food for Autumn
Faith Food for Winter
Faith Food for Spring
Faith Food for Summer
The New Birth
Why Tongues
In Him
God's Medicine
You Can Have What You Say
How Tb Write Your Own Ticket With God
Don't Blame God
Words
Plead Your Case
How Tb Keep Your Healing
I Believe in Visions
Exceedingly Growing Faith

The Woman Question
New Thresholds of Faith
Prevailing Prayer to Peace
Concerning Spiritual Gifts
Bible Faith Study Course
Bible Prayer Study Course
The Holy Spirit and His Gifts
Growing Up, Spiritually
Redimido De La Pobreza, La Enfermedad, La Muerte
La Fe, Lo Que Es
Siete Pasos Para Recibir El Espiritu Santo
?Piensa Usted Bien? O Mai?
La Autoridad Del Creyente
Como Desatar Su Fe
Seven Things You Should Know About Divine Healing
How You Can Be Led By The Spirit of God
What To Do When Faith Seems Weak and Victory Lost
The Name of Jesus
The Art of Intercession
BOOKS BY KENNETH HAGIN JR.
Man's Impossibility—God's Possibility
Because of Jesus
UNITY: Key To The Age of Power
Faith Worketh By Love
Blueprint for Building Strong Faith
Seven Hindrances to Healing
The Past Tense Of God's Word

The Art of
Intercession
Handbook on How To Intercede

By Kenneth E. Hagin

Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations in this
volume are from the King James Version of the Bible.
Scripture quotations identified as Amplified are from The
Amplified Bible.

First Edition •
1980
ISBN0-89276-503-8

In the U.S. write:
Kenneth Hagin Ministries
P.O. Box 50126
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74150

In Canada write:
Kenneth Hagin Ministries
P.O. Box 335
Islington (Toronto), Ontario
Canada, M9A 4X3

Copyright © 1980 RHEMA Bible Church
AKA Kenneth Hagin Ministries
All Rights Reserved Printed in
United States of America

Contents
Acknowledgment
1.

Why Pray? ...................................................................... 1

2.

The Prayer of Intercession:
One Kind of Prayer ...................................................... 5

3.

Man's Need for an Intercessor ......................................... 9

4.

Jesus, Our Intercessor ................................................... 11

5.

The Holy Spirit:
Our Helper in Intercession ........................................... 15

6.

The Holy Spirit:
Groanings and Travail ................................................ 19

7.

The Holy Spirit and Our Infirmities .......................... 23

8.

Interceding Against the
Infirmity of Sickness ..................................................... 27

9.

The Intercession of the Believer ................................... 33

10.

Ingredients for Successful Intercession ........................ 37

11.

Knowing God's Love .................................................. 45

12.

Identification .................................................................49

13.

Interceding for the Lost ................................................ 51

14.

Until Christ Be Formed in You .....................................59

15.

What Is "Praying in the Spirit"? ................................... 63

16.

Quiet Intercession ....................................................... 71

17.

Not-So-Quiet Intercession ........................................... 77

18.

Boldness ........................................................................ 81

19.

Fervency ........................................................................ 87

20.

Desire ........................................................................... 89

21.

Perseverance ................................................................. 93

22.

Intercession Against Sin ............................................... 95

23.

Intercession for Deliverance ...................................... 99

24.

The Interceding Body .................................................105

25.

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness ..............I l l

26.

Fasting .........................................................................129

27.

Interceding for Your Nation

28.

Reviving the Art ..........................................................141

.....................................131

Chapter 1 Why
Pray?
Years ago I read a statement John Wesley made and it
stayed with me. Wesley said, "It seems God is limited by
our prayer life—that He can do nothing for humanity
unless someone asks Him."
A while later, in 1949, I was reading after another
writer who made that same statement. But this fellow
added, "Why this is, I do not know."
"Why doesn't he know?" I asked. Then I found out I
didn't know either.
Yet if Wesley's statement is correct—and it seems to be
as you read through the Bible—then we who are to pray
should know more about it.
I began to examine the Bible to find out why, if God
wants to do something for humanity, He cannot unless
somebody asks Him. I found the answer through study of
God's Word.
You see, though some people have built up "spiritual
air castles" that God is running everything in this world,
He is not.
During the Vietnam War a nationally syndicated
newspaper columnist began one column by stating that he
was not a Christian. He said that he was not an atheist
because the atheist says there is no God.
"I suppose you would classify me an agnostic," he
wrote. "The agnostic says there may be a God, but if there
is, I don't know it. Actually, I am prone to believe there is a
Supreme Being. I do not believe that everything here just
happened. I believe there is a Creator somewhere.
"But I have never read the Bible. I do not attend
church. One reason I don't is that what the Christians say

2

The Art of Intercession

about God doesn't agree with what I think a Creator
should be, nor with what I can see of Him in nature.
"Even ministers say, 'God has everything under
control. He's running everything.'
"Well, if He is, He sure has things in a mess. People are
killing each other. Little children are dying. Little
children are hungry. Women are suffering. There are wars
everywhere.
"If God has everything under control, do you mean God
is running those wars?"
Even an unregenerate columnist knew that wasn't
right.
God is not ruling in this world. He is not ruling on the
earth.
Thank God, He will one day!
But right now His will is not being carried out on the
earth, except in the lives of those who surrender to Him.
That is easy to see if you will accept what the Bible
says. The Bible says that God is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance (2
Peter 3:9). It is obvious that His will is not being carried
out.
When individuals accept the Lord Jesus Christ as their
Savior, it is carried out in their lives. But if God were
running things and pushing His will off on people, since
He is not willing that any should perish, He would make
everybody get saved today and we would go into the
Millennium tomorrow.
As I examined God's Word for the "why" behind John
Wesley's statement, I saw a truth I had never seen before,
though I had been in the ministry many years.
As I asked the Lord about it, He said to me, "Go back to
the Book of Beginnings."

Why Pray?

3

I knew He meant the Book of Genesis. I reread it. I had
read it many times. I had heard it as a Sunday School boy.
But I saw it in a different light this time.
I saw that God made the world and the fullness thereof.
He made His man, Adam.
Then He said, "Adam, I give you dominion over all the
work of my hands" (Gen. 1:26,27; Ps. 8:6).
God did not say, "I am going to dominate through you."
He said, "I give you dominion over all the work of my
hands." Therefore Adam had dominion upon this earth
and in this world. He was originally, in a sense, god of this
world.
But Satan came and lied to Adam. Adam committed
high treason and sold out to Satan. Then Satan became the
god of this world.
Second Corinthians 4:4 calls Satan "the god of this
world." As such, he has dominion. Where? In this world.
He will have that dominion, he will be god of this
world, until Adam's lease runs out.
God cannot legally and justly move in and take away
that dominion from the devil. The devil has dominion
here. He has a right. He has Adam's lease. And God cannot
do anything unless somebody down here asks Him.

Chapter 2
The Prayer of Intercession:
One Kind of Prayer
Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for
all saints.
—Ephesians 6:18
Notice that says, "Praying with ALL prayer
The Amplified translation reads, "Pray . . . with ALL
MANNER of prayer __ "
Another translation reads, "Praying with ALL KINDS
of prayer
But the translation that really strikes a note in my own
spirit is Goodspeed's. It reads, "Use EVERY KIND of
prayer and entreaty, and at every opportunity pray in the
Spirit." The Bible teaches several kinds of prayer—and
the different rules governing them.
The church world makes a mistake in not differentiating between those different kinds of praying. We
simply put all prayer in the same sack and shake it all out
together. Many prayers are not working because people
are using the wrong rules and laws.
In the field of sports, for instance, we have baseball,
basketball, football, golf, tennis, etc. These are all kinds of
sports—but they are not all played by the same rules.
Wouldn't it be confusing to play a baseball game with
football rules, or vice versa?
The reason people are confused and have a prayer
problem is that they have their rules and laws all mixed

6

The Art of Intercession

up together. They take rules which govern one kind of
praying and try to apply them to other kinds of praying.
Speaking illustratively, they've got football, baseball,
basketball, golf, and tennis rules supposedly all working
together. They are confused. And so is their prayer life.
One common misconception people have is they think
they should conclude every prayer with the words, "If it be
thy will." They claim that is how Jesus prayed. However,
Jesus prayed this way on only one occasion. That was in
the Garden of Gethsemane when He prayed the prayer of
consecration.
When they attempt to pray the prayer of faith (the
prayer of petition, the prayer to change things), they
conclude it with "if it be thy will." And their prayer is
hindered because they are uncertain of His will—His
Word.
They may say, "I don't understand why that didn't
work." That would be like saying at a football game, "I
don't see why someone doesn't hit a home run."
Don't be confused. Go to the Rulebook! Go to the Bible
and see how to pray.
I will list here several kinds of prayers the Bible
teaches. However, I cannot go into detail on them in this
book. (I do have books on prayer which deal with them.)
*The Prayer of Faith: the prayer of petition, the prayer
to change things (Matt. 21:22; Mark 11:24). This prayer,
always to be based on God's revealed will in His Word,
never contains an "if."
*The Prayer of Consecration: the prayer of consecration and dedication of our lives for God's use; to go
anywhere and do anything. In this prayer we pray, "If it be
thy will" (Luke 22:42).
*The Prayer of Commitment: casting your cares upon

The Prayer of Intercession: One Kind of Prayer

7

the Lord in prayer (1 Peter 5:7).
*The Prayer of Worship (Acts 13:1-4; Luke 24:52,53).
*The Prayer of Agreement (Matt. 18:18-20).
* Prayer in the Spirit: praying in tongues (1 Cor.
14:14,15).
^United Prayer (Acts 4:23-31).
^Intercessory Prayer: a prayer for others; and our
subject in this book.
An intercessor is one who takes the place of another, or
pleads another's case.

Chapter 3 Man's Need
for an Intercessor
For he is not a man, as I am, that I should
answer him, and we should come together in
judgment. Neither is there any days man betwixt
us, that might lay his hand upon us both.
-^Job 9:32,33
The marginal rendering in my King James reference
Bible for the word translated "days man" is "umpire."
There is another reference reading "one who argues." In
other words, there is no one to argue our cases on both
sides.
The following translation is enlightening:
JOB 9:32,33 (The Amplified Bible)
32 For [GodI is not a mere man, as I am, that I should
answer Him, that we should come together in court.
33 There is no umpire between us, who might lay his
hand upon us both [would that there were]!
Job needed one who would be able to lay his hand on him
and a hand on God. He needed one to stand between him and
God and plead his case.
—Reidt

God saw that there was no intercessor.
ISAIAH 59:16
16 And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm
brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it
sustained him.

God saw there was no intercessor, so He supplied the
need. He sent Jesus.

Chapter 4 Jesus,
Our Intercessor
Jesus came to bridge the gap between God and sinful
man. Man needed someone to stand in the gap so he could
get back to God. Man needed an Intercessor. Jesus' sacrifice
established Him as the only fully trustworthy Intercessor
for mankind. He is the only Intercessor for the people of this
planet.
—Reidt
1 TIMOTHY 2:5
5 For there is one God, and ONE
MEDIATOR
BETWEEN GOD AND MEN, the man Christ Jesus.
He entered Heaven to appear in the presence of God for us.
—Reidt
HEBREWS 9:24
24 For Christ is not entered into the holy places made
with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into
heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God
FOR US.
He is our Intercessor at the right hand of the Father.
—Reidt
ROMANS 8:34
34 Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died,
yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, WHO ALSO MAKETH INTERCESSION
FOR US.
He saves to the uttermost. His divine power can never
cease for one moment.
—Reidt

11

12

The Art of Intercession

HEBREWS 7:25
25 Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, SEEING HE
EVER LIVETH TO MAKE INTERCESSION FOR
THEM.
There flows from Jesus to the Father an unceasing
stream of prayer and love for all people and for those that
have accepted Him as Savior and Lord.
Conversely there flows from the Father to Jesus the
answer for us. Therefore there flows from Jesus to every
member of His Body abundant grace for every timely need.
He abideth forever. Regardless of circumstances,
regardless of how dark things look, regardless of how we
feel, He abides in us forever if we continue in His goodness
(Rom. 11:22).
He is our High Priest forever at the right hand of the
Father.
—Reidt
HEBREWS 7:16,17
16 Who is made, not after the law of a
carnal
commandment, but after the power of an endless life.
17 For he testifieth, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec.

How long is Jesus Christ our High Priest? Forever!
HEBREWS 8:1
1 Now of the things which we have spoken this is the
sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the
right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens.
As our High Priest He exercises every function of His
office in endless Life-Power. This endless Life-Power never
ceases for one moment. Our faith and experience of that
intercession need never fail because its flow is endless.
—Reidt

Jesus, Our Intercessor

13

1 JOHN 2:1
1 My little children, these things write I unto you,
that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
Included in the idea of intercession is the fact that Jesus
is our Advocate. Advocate means "intercessor, consoler."
—Reidt

W. E. Vine's Expository Dictionary of New Testament
Words says of the Greek word PAEAKLETOS translated
advocate in First John 2:1, "It was used in a court of justice
to denote a legal assistant, counsel for the defence, an
advocate; then, generally, one who pleads another's cause,
an intercessor, advocate. In the widest sense, it signifies a
succourer, comforter."
When a person (Christian) sins, Jesus intercedes, and
then consoles in the fact that the sin is forgiven and that the
sin and its stain is washed away by His blood leaving the
person pure and clean. However, it is the will of God that a
person stop sinning (1 John 2:1; 5:3).
—Reidt

First John 2:1 is not written to encourage us to sin. God
wants us to stop sinning. But thank God, He did not stop
with saying, "My little children, these things write I unto
you, that ye sin not." If He had, then when we failed, we'd
think, We're out now; that's the end of it.
No, that's just half that verse. He goes on to say, "And if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous."
We have an Intercessor! We have a Consoler!
1 JOHN 5:3
3
For this is the love of God, that we keep his

14

The Art of Intercession
commandments: and his commandments are
not grievous.

The love law of the family of God is, "A new
commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as
I have loved you, that ye also love one another" (John 13:34).
Every step outside of love is sin.
We tend to get our minds on dos and don'ts, but many
Christians who abide perfectly by dos and don'ts are still
sinning. How? By not walking in love.
Their attitudes are wrong. You need to maintain a love
attitude toward your fellow man. If you do not, you are
sinning.
Thank God for His Intercessor. Thank God for His
standing in that place today to minister for us.
Jesus spent about 3% years in teaching and training His
apostles. Since His ascension He has been interceding for
about 2000 years for the people of this earth. What a dignity
this adds to prayer.
—Reidt

Jesus has been interceding 2000 years for the people of
this earth—not just for the Church!
Notice Hebrews 7:25 again, "Wherefore he is able also
to save them to the uttermost THAT COME UNTO GOD
[This is talking about people coming unto God.] by him,
seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them."

Chapter 5
The Holy Spirit: Our Helper
in Intercession
The Holy Spirit intercedes for us.
The Holy Spirit also helps us to intercede.
ROMANS 8:26,27
26 Likewise the Spirit also HELPETH our infirmities:
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
but the Spirit itself [Himself] maketh intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered.
27 And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is
the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession
for the saints according to the will of God.

Dr. T. J. McCrossan, who was a noted professor of
Greek, included this enlightening insight into the Greek
word translated "helpeth" in his book Bodily Healing and
the Atonement (now out of print):
. . . note well the word translated helpeth (sunantil
ambanetai). This is the present tense, 3rd person singular,
of the deponent verb "sunantilambanomai," and comes
from "sun"—together with, "anti"—against, and
"lambano"—I take hold of. This word therefore means "to
take hold against together with."
Then in Romans 8:26 we are told that the Holy Ghost
takes hold against our sicknesses together with someone.
With whom? Why, with ourselves . . . .
—McCrossan

Dr. McCrossan was dealing with only one side of
infirmity (feebleness of body; sickness), but we can clearly
see that the Holy Spirit helps by taking hold together with
15

16

The Art of Intercession

us against our infirmities.
If I said from the platform, "Some of you men stay after
the service and help us move this piano off the platform," I
would mean that I wanted them to take hold, together with
someone else, against the weight of the piano.
The Holy Spirit helps. He takes hold together with us
against the infirmity. If we do not take hold together with
against—He has nothing to do. We must take hold
together with first—then the Holy Spirit will help us.
Someone once said to me, "Since I found out the Holy
Spirit is doing my praying for me, I don't do too much
praying anymore."
Romans 8:26 does not say that the Holy Spirit does our
praying for us. He helps us. If the Holy Spirit did our
praying for us, that would make Him responsible for our
prayer life, and that's out of line with the Bible.
Read what Jesus said in the Four Gospels relative to
the Holy Spirit. For instance, "Andlwill pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth
him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall
be in you. I will not leave you comfortless . . . But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you" (John 14:16-18,26).
The Greek word PARACLETE here translated
"Comforter" literally means "one called along side to
help."
The Amplified translation gives the sevenfold
meaning of the word: Comforter, Counselor, Helper,
Intercessor, Advocate, Strengthened Standby.

The Holy Spirit: Our Helper in Intercession

17

The Holy Spirit is not sent to do the Christians' work
for them; He is sent to help them do it.
Jesus told the disciples to tarry in Jerusalem until they
were baptized with the Holy Ghost. He said, "... ye shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you:
and ye shall be witnesses unto me . . . ." (Acts 1:8).
One meaning of the Greek word translated power here
is "ability." Another way to say it is this, "After the Holy
Spirit comes upon you, you shall receive ability . . . . "
Ability to do what? To be witnesses.
Now the Holy Spirit is not going to do the witnessing—
you are going to do the witnessing with His ability.
Likewise the Holy Spirit will not do your praying for
you—but you are going to be able to pray with His ability.
He will help you do it.
We're the ones who are responsible for our lives.
We're the ones who are responsible to spread the
Gospel.
We're the ones who are responsible to pray. The Holy
Spirit is our helper.

Chapter 6
The Holy Spirit: Groanings
and Travail
One way the Holy Spirit helps us in intercessory
prayer is in groanings—and also in praying in other
tongues.
People often quote Romans 8:26 and 27 in reference to
the Holy Spirit's part in intercession. Yet to quote these
two verses alone does not give their full meaning. They are
linked to the verses before them.
I will print the entire passage here with capital letters
to show continuity:
ROMANS 8:22-27
22 For we know that the whole creation GROANETH
AND TRAVAILETH IN PAIN [Hold that in your mind;
all these verses speak of groanings.] together until now.
23 And not only they, BUT OURSELVES
ALSO,
which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, EVEN WE
OURSELVES
GROAN
WITHIN
OURSELVES,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body.
24 For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is
not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope
for? [This is not speaking about the new birth. It is written
to people already born again. It is talking about hoping for
the fullness of redemption when we have a new body.]
25 But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it.
26 LIKEWISE [or in the same manner, the Spirit helps us
by groanings] THE SPIRIT ALSO HELPETH OUR
INFIRMITIES: for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought: but the Spirit itself
[Himself]
MAKETH
INTERCESSION
FOR
US
WITH

19

20

The Art of Intercession
GROANINGS WHICH CANNOT BE UTTERED. 27 And
he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind
of the Spirit, BECAUSE HE MAKETH
INTERCESSION FOR THE SAINTS ACCORDING
TO THE WILL OF GOD.
All the creation is groaning and travailing in pain. The
ultimate consciousness of pain resides in God because of His
perfect love. Through our fellowship with God we are
brought into fellowship with the suffering creation. Our
consciousness of the groaning of the creation is much more
acute than when we were outside the Kingdom of God,
because we are united to God through Jesus Christ (John
15:5).
The Holy Spirit interprets to us God's consciousness of
suffering and makes intercession with groanings that
cannot be uttered.
—Reidt

The late P. C. Nelson was a noted linguist. Some 30
years ago, a secular magazine called him the leading
authority of the day on Greek and the second-ranked
authority on Hebrew. He could read and write 32
languages.
Nelson said that the Greek in Romans 8:26 actually
implies, "with groanings that cannot be uttered in
articulate speech."
They are uttered—but not in articulate speech.
Articulate speech is your regular speech. These groanings—I know both from the Bible and from experience—
come from within you, out of your spirit, but to be effective
they must escape your lips.
Again it is the Holy Spirit's helping you to pray. You
just cannot express them in your own words.
The New English Bible translates it, "through our

The Holy Spirit: Groanings and Travail

21

inarticulate groans the Spirit Himself is pleading for us."
The Phillips translation calls them "agonizing longings
which never find words."
We may not know how or what to ask in prayer so that
our prayer will correspond with our real needs. The Holy
Spirit moves us with groanings which we cannot express in
words and helps us direct our desires to the proper objects.
Also to help us to be specific is a part of the groanings. These
groanings, yearnings, are according to the will of God and
express His care for us. Although we cannot understand the
groanings (Greek, sigh), they are intelligible to God. He
always responds.
In adverse circumstances or conditions the Holy Spirit
intercedes with groanings.
—Reidt

I've noticed in my own life that sometimes I go along
and don't have too much of this. There is no particular
need for it at the moment. But then, in time of adverse
circumstances or conditions, those groanings begin to well
up inside me—that is the Holy Spirit's helping us to pray.
You yield yourself to the Spirit in prayer and He uses
you in this manner.
Take note of the word "likewise" in Romans 8:26. It
means "in the same manner."
In the same manner as what? In the same manner as
what was said before.
In other words, just as the whole creation groaneth and
travaileth in pain . . . even we ourselves groan within
ourselves . . . (and) LIKEWISE the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities . . . making intercession for us with groanings
which cannot be uttered.
Until everything does come into complete harmony
with the will of God, as Wilford Reidt said:

22

The Art of Intercession

There will always be the need for the Holy Spirit to
intercede with groanings. We may know the will of God but
only the Holy Spirit knows how to effectively present the
need. There are circumstances in which we are not sure of
how to pray. We need the groaning of the Holy Spirit in
intercession.
—Reidt

We will discuss groanings and travail further later in
this book—especially in connection with interceding for
the lost and interceding concerning the consummation of
God's plan and work in the earth.

Chapter 7
The Holy Spirit and
Our Infirmities
Likewise
the
Spirit
our INFIRMITIES . . . .

also

helpeth

—Romans 8:26

What does the word "infirmities" mean in this setting?
W. E. Vine's Expository Dictionary of New Testament
Words defines the Greek word as meaning: want of
strength, weakness, indicating inability to produce
results.
Our infirmities would keep us from producing prayer
results were it not for our divine Helper, the Spirit of God.
Ignorance
"Ignorance is an infirmity," Reidt points out. "We do
not always know."
Paul interceded for the Colossians that they would
know. (And in his prayer we find a clue as to how to
intercede for fellow Christians.)
COLOSSIANS 1:9
9 For this cause we also, since the day we heard it,
DO NOT CEASE TO PRAY for you, and to desire that
ye MIGHT BE FILLED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF
HIS WILL IN ALL WISDOM AND
SPIRITUAL
UNDERSTANDING.

The will of God and the Word of God are connected.
God has given us His written Word to reveal to us His
23

24

The Art of Intercession

will. We are to renew our minds with His Word so that the
first thing which comes to mind in a given situation is
what God has to say on the subject.
ROMANS 12:2
2 And be not conformed to this world: but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye
may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and
perfect, will of God.

God has given us His Word. The Holy Spirit takes that
Word and brings it to our remembrance. Then we know the
will of God if we know the Word of God.
JOHN 14:26
26 But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

Then, thanks be unto God, for things the Word does not
cover, we have an unction from the Holy One.
1 JOHN 2:20
20 But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye
know all things.
Dullness of Perception
Dullness of perception is an infirmity. Jesus referred to
this in Luke 24:25 when He said, "O fools, and slow of heart
to believe all that the prophets have spoken."
Paul interceded for the Ephesians because of this
condition . . . .
—Reidt

The Holy Spirit and Our Infirmities

25

EPHESIANS 1:16-18
16 [I] cease not to give thanks for you, making mention
of you in my prayers.
17 That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
glory, MAY GIVE UNTO YOU THE SPIRIT
OF
WISDOM and REVELATION in the KNOWLEDGE
OF HIM:
18 The EYES OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING BEING
ENLIGHTENED; THAT YE MAY KNOW what is the
hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the saints ....

(Again, as in his prayer for the Colossians, Paul's
Spirit-anointed prayer shows us how we can pray for
ourselves and for other believers to overcome dullness of
perception concerning things of the Lord.)
Because of this "dullness of perception" the Spirit has to
intercede with groanings.
As we learn to know the Word and the will of God, the
Spirit will not need to intercede for us so much in groanings.
We need the Scriptures to be opened up to us as Jesus did
to the two on the road to Emmaus and to the apostles (Luke
24:13-45).
—Reidt
LUKE 24:45
45 Then opened he their understanding, that they
might understand the scriptures.

The Holy Spirit is given to teach us all things (John
14:26). He teaches us directly in our own spirits. But He
also teaches us through teachers who know the Word of
God. God put teachers in the Church (Eph. 4:11,12). Do not
limit the amount of knowledge you can acquire from God.

26

The Art of Intercession

ROMANS 15:14
14 And I myself also am persuaded of you,
my
brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, FILLED
WITH ALL KNOWLEDGE, able also to admonish one
another.

That's where God wants us to be!

Chapter 8
Interceding Against the
Infirmity of Sickness
Another definition of the word translated "infirmity"
in Romans 8:26 is "feebleness of body, frailty, sickness."
Intercession is often necessary against this infirmity.
When I teach on faith and healing in crusades and
seminars, I can only cover one side of it. The meetings are
not long enough to cover the entire picture. Therefore I
have one purpose in mind—to move people to believe God
now and receive from God now. Thank God, a certain
percentage of them can and will.
We know—because we have the Bible and the Bible
imparts unto us the knowledge of God—that healing is
provided for everyone. We know it is the highest and the
perfect will of God that every believer not be sick, but live
out his full length of time here below until his body wears
out and he falls asleep in Jesus.
We've got to present God's perfect will or people won't
know about it. But we also know from the natural
standpoint that for a number of reasons that does not
happen with everybody—even all of God's children.
(If it does not, it doesn't mean the people were not
saved. It does not mean they did not go to Heaven.)
We know from the Old Testament that God made a
covenant with Israel. He said to them, "And ye shall serve
the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy
water; and I will take sickness away from the midst ofthee.
There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy
land: the number of thy days I will fulfil" (Ex. 23:25,26).
Wasn't that God's perfect will? Yes!
27

28

The Art of Intercession

But notice, it was conditional.
What was the condition? That they walk in His
statutes and keep His commandments.
As long as Israel kept the covenant there was no
sickness among them. No babies or young people died.
But then sickness and disease invaded them and
people began dying young. Why? Because they did not
keep their covenant.
Even in the household of the king a young child was
sick and the prophet foretold the child would die.
How did the prophet know that? By the Spirit of God.
It was not the perfect will of God that the child die, but
through sin the covenant was broken. The Spirit of God
said what would happen under the circumstances.
The same thing that happened with Israel happens
with individuals today. We have to tell people what God's
plan is and what God's covenant is and what belongs to
them. Healing is ours. Healing is in the atonement. Yet
not everyone is walking in their New Covenant rights.
Sometimes—if they are bona fide baby Christians—you can exercise your faith for them. You can carry
them on your faith for a while.
Sometimes you can get them to agree with you. You
can join your faith with theirs in the prayer of agreement
(Matt. 18:19). It works.
But there are still those who do not know, and who do
not understand, for whom intercession must be made.
A denominational minister who still pastored his
church told me how his wife had been marvelously healed
by the power of God after medical science had given up on
her case. Her healing brought them into the charismatic
movement.
"Then," he said, "we began to get our eyes open to the

Interceding Against the Infirmity of Sickness

29

baptism in the Holy Spirit." They were relatively new in
the things of the Spirit when his wife had an experience in
intercession for healing.
A young wife and mother of three who attended his
church regularly had to have open heart surgery. She died
on the operating table. After some time she was
resuscitated, but she did not regain consciousness.
The doctors said she would never regain consciousness—and that this was just as well, for her mind would
never be right; she had been without oxygen to her brain
for too long.
This pastor told me, "We comforted the young husband
and prayed with him all we could—but we were so new in
this . . . . Yet the woman persisted in living.
"The third night I woke up and suddenly realized my
wife wasn't in bed. After a little while I got up to look for
her. I heard groanings from the living room. I thought, She
got up and fell and hurt herself. I found her lying flat on the
living room floor groaning."
He got down beside her and said, "Honey, what's the
matter?"
She said, "I don't know. I don't understand it, but I just
can't let her die. I just can't do it."
For three nights, every night, she lay on the floor and
groaned and prayed out loud all night long.
The next day, suddenly, that young woman in the
hospital came to herself. The doctors were amazed. Her
mind was clear. She was perfectly all right. She was
restored to her husband and children.
Even though this pastor's wife was new in this, she
began to make intercession for the woman mainly because
the Spirit of God gave it to her—not because she worked it
up.

30

The Art of Intercession

How dependent we are upon the Holy Spirit in our
prayer life.
In dealing with the sick, I find that sometimes the
Spirit of God gives me intercession.
And there are times I have tried to get Him to but He
does not. You cannot make the Spirit of God do anything.
Instead of using the Spirit, let the Spirit use you.
Thirty years ago I went to a man's bedside to pray for
his healing. And I couldn't even say the word "heal." I'd
say, "Oh, God," and then instead of saying the word "heal,"
I'd say, "bless this man." I tried to make my tongue say
"heal" and it would not. I couldn't control my tongue.
I said, "Lord, why can't I pray for this man's healing?
He's not old enough to die. You promised us a minimum of
70 or 80 years."
(In Psalm 91, He actually said, "with long life will I
satisfy you." If we are not satisfied at the end of 70 or 80
years, we can go on until we are satisfied.)
But the Lord said to me, "Yes, but he was born again 36
years ago. I've been waiting on him to put away sin for 36
years. (Think about the patience of God!) He's never lived
right over two weeks at a time in 36 years. So I judged him
and turned him over to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus."
(That's in the Bible. Read the fifth chapter of First
Corinthians and the last part of the eleventh chapter.)
Then the Spirit said to me, "You can't pray for his
healing, but you can do this. Tell him you are going to lay
your hands on him to be filled with the Holy Spirit and his
last days will be better than his first."
I told him what the Lord said. When I laid my hand on
his forehead, instantly, he started speaking with tongues.

Interceding Against the Infirmity of Sickness

31

I left and went ray way. When I came back over a
month later, he was dead and buried. But they told me he
sat up in bed and sang and talked in tongues three days
and nights. Then he had a glorious homegoing.
That wasn't God's perfect will for him. But it certainly
beat going to hell.
I went off down the highway in my car, crying and
singing, "Grace, grace, God's grace. Grace that is greater
than all of our sins."
Sometimes I have tried to make intercession for people,
and it would seem like I ran up against a blank wall, or
down a blind alley. I just didn't get anywhere because the
Spirit of God didn't take hold with me.
Identification
Sometimes in making intercession for others against
physical sickness it will seem in the spirit—literally,
physically it is not so—but it will seem in the spirit that
the same thing fastens itself upon your body. You see, you
are taking the place of another.
Sometimes I hurt just like they hurt. If they are sick at
their stomach, I get sick to my stomach. If they can't
breathe, I gasp for breath. I am identifying with them.
Since 1949, with only one exception, every time I have
made intercession for the sick and taken on their
symptoms, they always received their healing. And that
one exception, Jesus appeared on the scene and said, "I
have come to heal him, but he won't let me."

Chapter 9 The
Intercession of the Believer
I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be made for all men; For kings, and for
all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
—1 Timothy 2:1,2
The Spirit of God, through the Apostle Paul, exhorted
believers to put something first—not second, nor third, but
first.
First of all, supplications (petitions), prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks (gratitude; grateful
language to God as an act of worship), are to be made for
all men; for kings (or presidents), and for all who are in
authority.
On what grounds can we do this?
On what basis can we petition, pray, intercede, and
give thanks for others?
We can legally do it because we are one with the Great
Intercessor.
One With the Great Intercessor
We have already talked about Jesus as Intercessor—
and now we see that because we are one with Him, we are
one with the Great Intercessor.
1 CORINTHIANS 6:17
17 But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit.
33

34

The AH of Intercession
EPHESIANS 5:30
30 For we are members of his body, of bis flesh, and of
his bones.
2 PETER 1:4
4 Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
1 CORINTHIANS 12:27
27 Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular.

Christ is the Head. We are the Body. The head and the
body are one. We are one with Him in carrying out His
work in the earth.
He is the Great Intercessor. Therefore we are one with
Him in His intercessory ministry.
We are one with Him in His ministry of reconciliation.
2 CORINTHIANS 5:18-20
18 And all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the
ministry of reconciliation;
19 To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them; and hath committed unto us the word of
reconciliation.
20 Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's
stead, be ye reconciled to God.

We are partakers of His sufferings. (More about this
later.)
2 CORINTHIANS 1:7
7 And our hope of you is stedf ast, knowing, that as ye

The Intercession of the Believer

35

are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of
the consolation.

Wilford Reidt capsules it like this: "He is our great
Intercessor. He is the great Intercessor for all mankind. As
members of His Body, the Church, we partake in that
intercession."
Therefore, our intercession will find its pattern in Him.

Chapter 10
Ingredients for
Successful Intercession
Love—the God-kind of love, "agape"—is the first
prerequisite for successful intercession. And if you are a
child of God, you have this kind of love.
ROMANS 5:5
5 . . . the love [agape] of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.

When you were born again, God became your Father.
He is a love God. You are a love child of a love God. You are
born of God, and God is love, so you are bom of love. The
nature of God is in you. And the nature of God is love.
Ours is a love family. Everyone in the family has it, or
else they are not in the family.
Now they may not be exercising it. They may be like
the one-talent guy who wrapped his talent in a napkin and
buried it. But the Bible declares that the love of God has
been shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost. That
means the God-kind of love has been shed abroad in our
spirits.
This is a love family. Love is the basis for all the
activity of the Body of Christ in the earth.
1THESSALONIANS 4:9
9 But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I
write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to
love one another.

The love law of the family of God is:
37

38

The Art of Intercession

JOHN 13:34
34 A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another.
We are also commanded to love our enemies:
MATTHEW 5:44,45
44 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you,
and
persecute you;
45 That ye may be the children of your Father which is
in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust.

The reason we can do this—love our enemies, bless
them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray
for them which despitefully use us, and persecute us—is
because of the manner of love the Father has bestowed
upon us:
1 JOHN 3:1
1 Behold, what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God. . . .

Your Will and Love
This agape love—this God-kind of love—involves the
choice of your will.
That love is inside your spirit if you are born again. But
you are the one who has to will to put it into practice. You
choose to let that love loose from within you.
We can choose to love all people—even our enemies.

Ingredients for Successful Intercession

39

Almost anyone can love those who love them, but the Bible
tells us to love our enemies.
We choose to love all people, even the unlovable. We love
as God loves. It involves (the) giving of our lives for the
benefit of mankind. This does not merely refer to dying
physically. It mainly refers to our being willing to give up
our own will and way and take time to pray and intercede
for all men.
—Reidt

God loved us while we were yet sinners and sent Christ
to die for us. We are to love the same way. We give our lives
for mankind.
This is where suffering comes in. This how we enter
into His suffering.
You're not suffering for Christ when you are sick with
pneumonia, or flu, or measles, or cancer. That's not His
suffering. He didn't have measles. He didn't have
pneumonia or leprosy.
We enter into His sufferings for humanity.
It involves sacrifice. It involves giving our lives for the
benefit of mankind.
There is suffering and sacrifice in giving up your own
will and life to intercede for others.
Compassion
Love is the basis for all Christian activity. Compassion
is an ingredient of divine love.
—Reidt

How do we know this is so?
Because God so loved the world that He gave Jesus.
And Jesus so loved us that He gave Himself for us. And in

40

The Art of Intercession

His earthly ministry, again and again we see compassion.

As we look at that wonderful truth, remember that
Jesus said, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father"
(John 14:9). If you want to see God, look at Jesus. Jesus is
the will of God in action. Jesus is the love of God in action.
And in His earthly ministry, He was moved with
compassion. . . .
MATTHEW 9:36-38
36 But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved
with compassion on them, because they fainted, and
were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
37 Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly
is plenteous, but the labourers are few.
38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he
will send forth labourers into his harvest.
Jesus had compassion on the people and asked us to
share in that compassion by praying that the Lord of the
Harvest would send laborers into the field.
—Reidt

Jesus was moved with compassion and healed the sick:
MATTHEW 14:14
14 And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude,
and was moved with compassion toward them, and he
healed their sick.

Jesus' compassion led to the feeding of the four
thousand:
MATTHEW 15:32
32 Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I
have compassion on the multitude, because they
continue with me now three days, and have nothing to

Ingredients for Successful Intercession
eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they
faint in the way.

In His compassion, Jesus healed the blind:
MATTHEW 20-.34
34 So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched
their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight,
and they followed him.

Compassion led to the healing of the leper:
MARK 1:40,41
40 And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and
kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou
wilt, thou canst make me clean.
41 And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his
hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be
thou clean.
In His compassion, Jesus healed every person who
asked (Mark 6:56, Luke 6:19, Matt. 4:23,24).
Jesus taught His disciples to share in His compassion by
sending out the twelve (Luke 9:1-6) and the seventy (Luke
10:1-19).
His compassion was to be carried on after His Ascension
as He made healing one of the signs of the believer (Mark
16:16-18).
His compassion was demonstrated after His Ascension
(Acts 5:15,16; 19:11,12; 28:8,9).
In every instance where Jesus was moved with
compassion, the person or persons were delivered.
Human sympathy says, "I know how you feel; I'm so
sorry."
Divine compassion says, "I feel how you feel." And it
brings deliverance.
Jesus felt as Mary and Martha felt as He groaned within
and also wept.
—Reidt

41

42

The Art of Intercession

JOHN 11:33,35
33 When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the
Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned
in the spirit, and was troubled _
35 Jesus wept.
Jesus' compassion brought deliverance. If we have the
divine compassion of Jesus, there will be deliverance. But
I think too much of the time we've tried to bring
deliverance without the divine compassion. That's where
prayer and intercession come in.
Weeping with them that weep brings deliverance
(Rom. 12:15).
Dr. John G. Lake is known for his ministry well
marked with apostolic ideals. He did an amazing work in
South Africa just after the turn of the century.
So many healings took place in his tabernacle in
Johannesburg, report of them reached the leaders of the
nation. Some of the top government people sought him for
help on the behalf of the wife of a government official.
When Lake went to her home, he found her bedridden
with terminal cancer. He determined that she was a
Christian. Then he began to give her Scripture to teach
her about divine healing and to get her faith activated.
She made a decision to trust God for her healing. The
doctors had given her up to die and were only giving her
pain relievers to keep her comfortable. But she decided to
stop all drugs.
She said, "If I'm going to trust God for my healing, and I
am, then I'm going to throw myself completely over on His
mercy."
"She was in such pain," Lake said, "that one of the
ministers of the church and I stayed at her bedside around
the clock, praying. As we prayed, she would get relief."

Ingredients for Successful Intercession

43

One morning, after having prayed all night, Lake went
home just long enough to bathe and shave. Then he started
back.
"When I came within two blocks of the house," Lake
said, "I heard her screaming in pain. At the sound of those
screams, somehow I seemed to enter into a divine
compassion . . . . "
That's what you do in intercession.
Lake entered into the sufferings of Jesus. He began to
feel just like Jesus feels. For Jesus can be touched with the
feelings of our infirmities (Heb. 4:15).
Lake said, "I found myself running those last two
blocks without even thinking what I was doing. Without
thinking, I rushed into the room, sat down on the edge of
the bed, picked up that emaciated body in my arms like a
baby, and began to weep. While I was weeping, she was
perfectly healed."
Somehow, the compassion of Jesus, the love of God, was
able to permeate his heart, his spirit.
Dedicated believers can enter into that area of
compassion by one way—and you will not get there any
other way—fellowship with God.
You cannot fellowship with God . . . you cannot sit in
the Presence of the Great God of this universe . . . without
His love permeating your being . . . without His compassion flowing into you.
And it is when you can get into this place that you will
be able to do as Jesus said . . .
JOHN 14:12
12 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on
me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater
works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
Father.

44

The Art of Intercession

The works that He did were born out of love and
compassion. The works that the believing ones shall do are
products of sharing in His ministry of love and compassion.

Chapter 11
Knowing God's Love
And to know the love of Christ, which passeth
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the
fulness of God.
—Ephesians 3:19
To intercede effectively, you must know the great love
God has for all humanity.
He sends the rain on the just and the unjust (Matt. 5:45). He makes
the sun to rise on the evil and the good (Matt. 5:45).
He is kind to the unthankful and to the evil (Luke 6:35).
—Reidt

Since the love of God is in us, and the love of God has
been shed abroad in our hearts, we are to be kind like God
is kind—to the unthankful and to the evil.
Whosoever Will
Jesus purchased a gift of salvation for anyone who
would accept it (Eph. 2:8; Rev. 22:17). God commands all
men everywhere to repent (Acts 17:30). His hand of mercy
is extended to all mankind.
Our intercession for all men is not so much for God to
extend His mercy. This He has already done through Jesus.
Our intercession is mainly to break the bondage that the
devil has over men.
The devil has blinded men (2 Cor. 4:3,4). We are to loose
the sinner from the blindness that he may see the Light.
Fasting, prayer, and intercession are among the
weapons of our warfare that pull down the strongholds of
the enemy (2 Cor. 10:4).
—Reidt
45

46

The Art of Intercession

One afternoon a number of years ago, I was lying
across my bed resting between the morning and evening
service. I had my Bible and another book and I was
studying. Into my spirit—not into my mind—came an
understanding of some of these things I'd never had before.
I saw this Scripture in a way I'd never seen it to that time:
2 CORINTHIANS 4:3,4
3 But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost:
4 In whom the god of this world hath bunded the
minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

I saw how we had missed it in praying for the lost.
I don't mean it unkindly, but just to say, "God save
Uncle John and Aunt Lucy," does about as much good as it
does to twiddle your thumbs and say, "Twinkle, twinkle,
little star." God has already done all He's going to do about
saving them.
But I didn't know that. Until that afternoon. I'd been
praying like that about my own relatives.
That afternoon, I heard the Lord say to my spirit, "No
human in his right mind would drive his car down the
highway 100 miles an hour, past blinking red warning
lights, past signs that said, 'Danger! Bridge out!' and
plunge himself out into eternity. But a drunk man
would—a doped man would. The same thing is true
spiritually. No man in his right mind would plunge
himself out into eternity without God. But the god of this
world has blinded their minds."
He gave me this Scripture, "In whom the god of this
world hath blinded the minds . . . . " (2 Cor. 4:4).

Knowing God's Love

47

I could hear the Spirit of God challenging me, "You've
approached it wrongly. You've worked on the wrong end of
the thing. You fasted and prayed that I would do
something and I've done all I'm ever going to do. The blood
has already been shed. The Gospel has already been given.
The light is already here. It can't shine in because of what
the devil has done. What you've got to do is break that
power over them."
Intercession does not change God—God never changes.
Prayer does not change God. Prayer changes you and it
changes others. It does not change God.
I saw what I had to do for my brother, Dub. I'd been
fasting and praying that God would save him off and on for
15 years, and if it ever did any good, I couldn't tell it. Dub
was the black sheep of the family. Anything you could
mention, he'd done. I knew if it would work on him, it
would work on anyone.
I rose up off the bed with my Bible in one hand, and the
other hand lifted, saying, "In the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, I break the power of the devil over my brother
Dub's life, and I claim his deliverance. (That meant I
claimed his deliverance from that blindness, that bondage
of Satan.) And I claim his full salvation in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ."
Within three weeks, my brother was born again.
Here is where intercession comes in—we are to loose
the sinner from the blindness that he may see the light.
If we can get people to see God as He really is, they'll
want to love Him.
We are one with the great Intercessor in His ministry
of reconciliation.
Let's look at this Scripture again in the Amplified
translation:

48

The Art of Intercession
2 CORINTHIANS 5:19 (Amplified) 19 It was God
(personally present) in Christ, reconciling and
restoring the world to favor with Himself, not
counting up and holding against [men] their
trespasses [but cancelling them]; and committing to us
the message of reconcilation—of the restoration to
favor.

Whom did He reconcile unto Himself? The world!
Whose trespasses are canceled? The world's!
That's what will be so terrible—people will go to hell,
and when they get there, they'll find out we hadn't told
them the truth. We hadn't told them everything was
canceled out.
That's how God is kind to the unthankful and the evil.
And He has given to us that message, that word of
reconciliation.
Yet we have preached, "God is going to get you if you
don't watch out. He's after you."
People have trained their children, saying, "Don't do
that. Jesus won't love you if you do that."
That's a lie. He may not want them to do it, but He'll
still love them anyhow.
Telling children, "God won't love you, if you do that,"
causes them to grow up with their minds blinded to the
light of His love. And it's very difficult to get that kind of
teaching out of people.
He has given to us the ministry of reconciliation.
We used to think we had to preach people under
conviction. So we went out and beat them over the head, so
to speak.
No! The Spirit of God will convict them.
Ours is the ministry of reconciliation. When we can get
people to see God as He really is, they will want to love
Him.

Chapter 12
Identification
We must identify with the one for whom we are
interceding.
Jesus identified with Mary and Martha in the death of
Lazarus. They were groaning and weeping. He groaned
within and wept. He went to the grave and raised Lazarus
from the dead.
Romans 12:15 brings in focus the idea of identification
with others. "Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep
with them that weep." The real believer can go from the
house of rejoicing . . . to the house of weeping and weep with
them.
Paul identified with the Jews that he might gain the
Jews. Paul identified to them without law as without law
(being not without law to God, but under law to Christ) that
he might gain them that are without law. To the weak he
became as weak that he might gain the weak. He said that
he was made all things to all men, that he by all means
might save some (1 Cor. 9:19-22).
—Reidt

The identification we are speaking of is that identification with the object that brings deliverance.
Jesus Christ, the great Intercessor, is our example. He
identified with man when He, who had always existed in
the form of God, emptied Himself and took the form of a
bond servant, " . . . and was made in the likeness of men:
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross" (Phil. 2:7,8).
Jesus Christ identified with fallen man to bring our
deliverance.
As one with Him, we identify with the lost in
intercession.
49

Chapter 13 Interceding
for the Lost
Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen
such things? Shall the earth be made to bring
forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought
forth her children.
—Isaiah 66:8
Many have looked at this verse and thought it referred
only to the rebirth of Israel as a nation. Yet most Old
Testament prophecy has a twofold application—first the
natural, then the spiritual. Isaiah is prophesying that
Israel will be reborn as a nation in the natural, and that in
the spiritual, Zion will travail and bring forth her
children.
Who is Zion?
The New Testament tells us that the New Covenant
believer is not come to Mount Sinai where Moses received
the Ten Commandments under the Old Covenant—but
that we are come to Mount Zion. It calls the Church, Mount
Zion.
HEBREWS 12:18-23
18 For ye are not come unto the mount that might be
touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto black
ness, and darkness, and tempest,
19 And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words;
which voice they that heard intreated that the word
should not be spoken to them any more:
20 (For they could not endure that which
was
commanded, And if so much as a beast touch the
mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a
dart:
51

52

The Art of Intercession
21 And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake:)
22 BUT YE ARE COME UNTO MOUNT SION, and
unto the city of the living God, the
heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels,
23 TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CHURCH
OF THE FIRSTBORN, which are written in heaven,
and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect,
24 And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things
than that of Abel.

Notice this calls the Church of the general assembly of
the firstborn, "Mount Zion." And our text in Isaiah 66:8
said that, "as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her
children."
GALATIANS4:19
19 My little children, of whom I travail in birth again
until Christ be formed in you.

Paul is writing to the churches throughout Galatia
(Gal. 1:2). He intimates that he travailed in birth for them
to be saved in the beginning. (Now he is travailing
"again.")
We talk about making conversions. God does not
mention conversions—He wants births. You must be born
again!
You cannot have births without having travail. The
picture here is of a woman having a baby.
(Now I do not mean that one must come to the altar and
travail to be bom again. The baby does not birth itself. But
for true births out of the kingdom of darkness and into the
kingdom of light, some intercessor, somewhere, has
travailed.)

Interceding for the Lost

53

Paul travailed. It was a spiritual activity. It is an
intense suffering in the inner man. It is comparable to the
pangs of natural childbirth. It involves real intercession. I
had a friend, now with the Lord, who travailed in prayer
and intercession until you would think his heart would
break literally. Sure it is hard on the outer man.
—Reidt

I've been there myself, again and again. I could give
any number of illustrations. This is one of the most
outstanding, however.
It happened the first Friday night of December 1953 in
Phoenix, Arizona, where I was conducting a meeting.
During the meeting I stayed in the home of one of the
families in the church. After the Friday night service they
invited their three married daughters and their husbands
to come to the home for refreshments and a time of
visiting.
We men were seated in the living room talking. The
women were in the kitchen preparing to serve the food.
Suddenly, I had an urge to pray. Now, don't misunderstand me; nobody made me do it, but there was a
burden about it. An urge to pray just seemed to fall upon
me.
I knew these folks would understand such a thing. (If
they would not have, I would have excused myself and
gone to the privacy of my bedroom to pray.) So I said to our
host, "I've got to pray, and I have to pray now."
Brother F. called the ladies from kitchen, "Just forget
about the food. Brother Hagin's got a burden to pray. Let's
all just join him."
I knelt beside a large chair in the living room. The
moment my knees touched the floor I was in the spirit. I
lifted my voice, praying in other tongues and groanings.

54

The Art of Intercession

It seemed like down deep within me I was hurting so
badly I was about to deliver a baby. In travail there's
pain—there are groanings.
I knew I was interceding. An intercessor is one who
takes the place of another. When that spirit of intercession
for the lost is upon you, you'll feel within your own being
that you are lost. You know you are not. You know you are
a child of God. But you take upon yourself the condition
the other person is in. That person is lost. So you feel lost.
I've had people come to me many times saying
something like this, "Brother Hagin, I know I'm saved and
filled with the Holy Spirit, but sometimes in the service
when God begins to move, I start to feel on the inside just
like I'm lost myself. When the altar call is given, I wonder
if I should go to the altar myself. I wonder if perhaps I'm
not right with God."
"That's intercession," I explain to them. "That's the
Spirit of God trying to roll the burden of some lost soul off
on someone. He was searching through the congregation
to find someone He could use.
"When that happens again, if you can't contain
yourself, and the service is still going on, get up and go to a
place of prayer. Otherwise, sit there quietly and groan
within yourself, until the person you are interceding for
responds to the call of God."
There is something out here in this area that we need
to learn again. The art of intercession is a lost art among
us. We'll never really have the depth of the move of the
Spirit of God until we have that kind of intercession.
I prayed that Friday night in Phoenix with groanings,
and tears, and other tongues for about an hour. I knew I
was interceding for someone who was lost. And I knew to
keep at it until I had a note of victory.

Interceding for the Lost

55

(A note of victory—that is when the burden lifts, and
you feel light, wonderful, and blessed. Or, when you begin
to sing in other tongues. Or, when you begin to laugh
instead of groan. In other words, you have whatever it is
you are praying about.)
Once in a great while, the Lord will let me know what
or whom I am praying about. That Friday night, He let me
know. He gave me a vision.
I saw the church where I was holding the meeting full
of people.
I saw myself at the pulpit preaching.
I heard myself preach a sermon I'd never preached
before. I heard myself give four points to this sermon. (I got
a brand new sermon which I preached the following
Sunday night.)
I saw myself finish the sermon, then lean over the
pulpit and point to a man sitting the second seat from the
front.
I heard myself say as I pointed to him, "Friend, God
shows me you are past 70 years and that you've been
brought up to believe that there is no hell. But He told me
to tell you that you have one foot in hell right now, and the
other one is slipping in."
I saw that man leave the pew, come and kneel in the
altar, and be saved.
I knew I was making intercession for him. I knew I was
travailing in prayer for him.
The folks present knew I'd seen something. So they
asked me. I told them. I described the man to them. I
described how he was dressed.
The following Sunday night everything came to pass
exactly as I had seen it on the preceding Friday.
Those people who had prayed with me told me after the

56

The Art of Intercession

service, "Brother Hagin, we had that fellow located before
you ever got to the service. He was sitting where you said
he'd be sitting. He was dressed just the way you saw him.
We'd never seen him before." Nobody in that church had
ever seen him. So they wouldn't have known to pray. But
the Holy Spirit knew.
The man was saved along with others. After the service
he came to hug the pastor and me.
He said to the pastor, "This preacher here said I was
past 70. I'm 72. This is the first time I've ever been inside a
church building. The preacher said I was raised to believe
there is no hell. My parents were Universalists. They
taught me that there is no hell.
"This preacher told me that God told him to tell me I
had one foot in hell and the other was slipping. I know
exactly what He meant. That's one reason why I came to
Phoenix. I'm from up north where it's cold. But I had a
severe heart attack and my doctor thought it would help
my health to come here."
Somebody said, "He got saved Sunday night." But it
really happened on Friday night when I was travailing in
birth.
Do you know why babies are not being born into
churches today? (Oh, some have a lot of conversions, but
few births.) It is because there is no travail—no groanings.
And when some people begin to travail and groan in
prayer, others are ready to throw them out.
Years ago, I ministered in a Full Gospel church that
was running several hundreds in the Sunday morning
services. And on Sunday night the building was almost
full.
They had a dear old lady, dear old Grandma Greer, who
was at that time 80 some odd years of age. She'd been in

Interceding for the Lost

57

Pentecost since the turn of the century. Away back around
1906 she had been baptized in the Holy Spirit. She knew
something about travailing and waiting on God. (The
old-timers did.) She would pray at the altar, groaning
and praying in other tongues in the spirit of
travail—carrying the entire thing, probably, on her own
back.
Three years later I came back to this same church.
Instead of having the building full for Sunday morning
services, they had about 80 or 90 people. On Sunday night
they had 35 to 50.
"What happened?" I asked someone.
One of the members said, "Do you remember old
Grandma Greer?"
"Yes."
"Well, she was in the altar praying like she always did,
and the new pastor got up and said, 'We're not going to
have any of that around here.' "
He put a stop to it. They had no more babies being born,
because there was no travailing. When Zion travails she
brings forth her children.

Chapter 14 Until Christ
Be Formed in You
My little children, of whom I travail in birth
again until Christ be formed in you.
—Galatians 4:19
Paul had travailed—groaned and prayed in other
tongues—for these people and they were born again.
(Travail carries the idea of a woman travailing in birth
with pain and agony and groanings.)
Now Paul says he is travailing again until Christ be
formed in you.
He travailed for them as sinners to be birthed into the
kingdom of God—now he is travailing for them as
Christians that they might become mature, that they
might grow up and not be baby Christians.
There is a similarity between spiritual growth and
physical growth. No one is born a full-grown human. In
the natural, people are born babies and they grow up. No
one is born a full-grown Christian. They are born babies.
Then they are to grow up, spiritually.
The Bible says, rrAs newborn babes, desire the sincere
milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby" (1 Peter 2:2).
These churches of Galatia were trying to get back
under the law instead of walking on in grace. Paul was
alarmed. So he was interceding, praying, travailing for
them that they mature and grow.
Epaphras did the same thing for the Colossian
Christians and those in Laodicea and Hierapolis.
COLOSSIANS 4:12,13
12 Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ,
59

60

The Art of Intercession

saluteth you, always labouring fervently for you in
prayers, that ye may stand perfect [mature] and
complete in all the will of God.
13 For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for
you and them that are in Laodicea, and them in
Hierapolis.

W. E. Vine's Expository Dictionary of New Testament
Words gives this meaning for the Greek word PANOS
which is translated "labouring" in verse 12: denotes
labours, toil; the consequence of toil, viz., distress,
suffering, pain. (This word is translated pain in
Revelation 16:10,11; 21:4.)
Vine also says that the word translated "zeal" in verse
13 is this same word PANOS in the best manuscripts.
The Centenary Translation of the New Testament
translates verse 12 like this: "Epaphras, one of yourselves,
salutes you, a slave of Christ who is always agonizing for
you in his prayers, that you may stand firm, mature, and
fully assured in all the will of God."
I remember particularly the wonderful experience
with God a young woman had when she came to the altar
during a revival meeting I was holding. She was
gloriously saved and gloriously baptized in the Holy
Spirit. Oh! what a glow was upon her face.
Just a little less than a year later, I was back in the
area and I inquired about her because of the very unusual
and marvelous experience she'd had with God.
"Oh," they said, with their faces dark and frowning,
"she's backslidden."
I said, "Oh, I hate that."
They said, "Yes, we do, too."
Then, just as plainly, the Spirit of God spoke up on the
inside of me and said, "Yes, and the church is to blame for

Until Christ Be Formed in You

61

it. The church is responsible for it."
I couldn't understand that for the longest time. How
could the church be responsible for somebody's backsliding?
Then I saw it in Galatians 4:19. "My little children, of
whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in
you."
You see, that church just saw her get saved and
baptized in the Holy Spirit. Then they said, "Well, she's
got it made now."
But she was a baby. They should have continued to
intercede and hold her up in prayer. Because they did not,
when judgment day comes, God will hold that church
responsible. He is going to require of every church
reponsibility for the babies born at its altars.
"What did you do with them?" will be the question.
"Did you teach them? Did you continue to pray for them?
Or, if they made a mistake, did you knock them down and
say, 'You backslidden buzzard, get right with God or get
out of here: one of the two' "?
While people are babies spiritually, somebody has to
carry them. Somebody has to feed them. Somebody has to
care for them.
This is one place where the ministry of intercession
comes in. Somebody has to intercede—to take the place of
another.
Intercessors need to hold them up as they're learning to
walk.
When my children or grandchildren fell as they were
learning to walk, I didn't slap them. I got hold of them and
loved them and said, "Just keep at it, honey. You'll learn."
In many cases, in praying for Christians, such travail
is not necessary because they are not so tightly bound as

62

The Art of Intercession

the Galatian church seemed to be.
Learn to listen to the Spirit of God and pray as He
directs.

Chapter 15 What Is
"Praying in the Spirit"?
Intercessory prayer can be made two ways.
(1) With your understanding. (In your own
language.)
(2) In the spirit. (In other tongues.)
Since praying in the spirit is so important, I am
including this chapter, which covers a broader scope than
intercession.
What is praying in the spirit?
EPHESIANS&18
18 Praying always with all prayer and supplication IN
THE SPIRIT, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all saints.

What does that mean in this verse, "Praying . . . in the
Spirit. . . . "?

I faced this question many years ago as a Baptist
pastor. I somehow knew inside me that whatever it was, I
wasn't doing it.
I wanted to know. I asked people.
Do you know what most people thought praying in the
spirit was?
They thought it meant praying with just a little more
vim, vigor, and vitality!
Then, too, Jude's statement written to believers
puzzled me.
JUDE20
20 But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your
most holy faith, PRAYING IN THE HOLY GHOST.
63

64

The Art of Intercession

I asked myself, "What is praying in the Holy Ghost?"
Whatever it was, I felt I wasn't doing it.
Now my head told me I was "praying in the spirit" and
"praying in the Holy Ghost."
But my heart told me, "You are not."
So I set out to find out for sure what those expressions
mean.
I thought, Paul is doing the writing here in Ephesians
where he speaks of "praying in the spirit." Did he ever say
anything anywhere else about praying in the spirit? If he
did, then he is talking about the same thing, wherever he
speaks of it.
So I began to run references on this phrase in Paul's
writings. They led me to the 14th chapter of First
Corinthians.
Now I hadn't gotten into the 14th chapter of First
Corinthians too much. The first Sunday of each quarter, I
preached from the 11th chapter just before we took the
Lord's Supper. I would skip the 12th chapter and preach
about love in the 13th chapter. Then I would skip over the
14th chapter and preach about the Resurrection in the
15th chapter. I was almost afraid of the 12th and 14th
chapters.
But I could see that if I was going to find out about
praying in the spirit, I had to get there, because it is there
that Paul said something about it. I found out that he
said . . . .
1 CORINTHIANS 14:2
2 For he that speaketh in a unknown tongue speaketh
not unto men, but unto God: for no man under standeth him; howbeit IN THE SPIRIT he speaketh
mysteries.

What is "Praying in the Spirit"?

65

In the spirit! In the spirit! In the spirit he speaketh
mysteries! There it was!
Well, if speaking with tongues was praying in the
spirit in the 14th chapter of First Corinthians, then when
Paul wrote of praying in the spirit in Ephesians 6:18, he
meant the same thing!
Now notice something:
1 CORINTHIANS 14:14,15
14 For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit
prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.
15 What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the
spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.

Let's read those same two verses from the Amplified
Bible:
1 CORINTHIANS 14:14,15 (Amplified)
14 For if I pray in an [unknown] tongue, my spirit [by
the Holy Spirit within me] prays, but my mind is
unproductive—bears no fruit and helps nobody.
15 Then what am I to do? I will pray with my spirit—by
the Holy Spirit that is within me; but I will also pray
intelligently—with my mind and understanding; I will
sing with my spirit—by the Holy Spirit that is within
me; but I will sing (intelligently) with my mind and
understanding also.

Paul said, "/ will pray with my spirit. . . / will pray
with my understanding." He said he would do it.
If praying in tongues is not for us today, then there is
no way we can pray in the spirit today.
And yet, we are spirit beings. We need to pray out of
our spirits and not just out of our heads.
Paul is talking here about two kinds of praying: (1)

66

The Art of Intercession

mental praying, and (2) spiritual praying.
Mental praying is "with the understanding," with the
mind. The church world as a whole has tried too long to get
by on only one kind of praying—mental praying.
Yet we cannot succeed with just mental praying alone.
Why not? God's Word gives the answer in Romans 8:26.
There are times when we do not know how to pray. It
would be impossible in these situations for mental praying
alone to get the job done. Spiritual praying is required.
Spiritual praying is praying out of your spirit in
utterances, in a tongue that is unknown to you, and
sometimes in groaning—all of which escape your lips.
ROMANS 8:26
26 Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for
we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but
the Spirit itself [Himself] maketh intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered.

We may not always understand the entire situation
surrounding a matter about which we are praying. But the
Holy Spirit does. When we allow Him to pray through us,
to help us in our prayer life, we will see amazing answers
to our prayers.
Every Spirit-filled believer can expect the Holy Spirit
to help him in making intercession in the spirit, in other
tongues. And that is our subject. But I want to mention
some other benefits and uses of praying in tongues.
Praying in the Spirit
Magnifying God
ACTS 10:46
46 For they heard them speak with tongues, and
magnify God ___

What is "Praying in the Spirit"?

67

Praying in the spirit, with tongues, is a way in which
we can magnify God.
For years, as a minister, I prayed—and had wonderful
times in prayer. I used to go down to the barn and get up in
the hay loft to pray—and I had marvelous times of prayer
there.
But I went away from those times disappointed,
though I was blessed. I would try to tell God how much I
loved Him. I would use all the descriptive adjectives at my
disposal to tell God how wonderful He is. I would exhaust
my vocabulary and leave that place of prayer with my
spirit feeling I had not said what I wanted to say.
My spirit felt cheated. Although my head did not
realize it, my spirit wanted to pray, too—apart from the
understanding.
Now, one of the things I appreciate most about being
filled with the Holy Spirit is praying with tongues. From
that day in 1937 when I was first Spirit-filled to this, I
have worshiped and communicated with God, praying and
singing in tongues, every single day. And I never have left
that place of prayer feeling that I didn't say what I wanted
to say, because my spirit was enabled by the Holy Spirit
who indwells me to say what it wanted to say.
If you are not doing so already, I invite you to come on
in and communicate with God supernaturally. God wants
to do so much more for you. He wants to communicate with
you in a better way. Know the joy of fellowshiping with the
Lord in the spirit.
Praying in the Spirit
To Edify Yourself
JUDE20
20 But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your
most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost.

68

The Art of Intercession
I CORINTHIANS 14:4

4
He that speaketh in an unknown tongue
edifieth
himself. __

There is one phase of speaking with tongues in our
prayer life that is not praying for someone else; it is not
interceding for anyone else. It is purely a means of
personal spiritual edification. It aids us spiritually. It
edifies us. It builds us up. We all need this kind of praying.
We cannot help others; we cannot edify others unless we
ourselves have been edified.
Take time to build yourself up by praying much in the
Holy Spirit—with other tongues.
Spiritual things are similar to natural things. Jesus
used natural things to explain spiritual things.
In the natural, no one will be expert and keen in any
area without working at it. In baseball, for instance, the
good hitter did not get into his position without batting
practice.
Likewise, things of the spirit don't fall on us like ripe
cherries off a tree. We will not be expert in spiritual things
unless we take time.
Praying in the spirit will help you to be keen to
spiritual things.
Praying in the Spirit
To Rest
ISAIAH 28:11,12

II For with stammering lips and another tongue will
he speak to this people.
12 To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may
cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing ....

Praying in the spirit and speaking in tongues is a rest.

What is "Praying in the Spirit"?

69

Speaking in tongues is a continual experience to assist
us in the worship of God. It is a flowing stream that should
never dry up. It will enrich your life spiritually. And it will
enable you to help others and to work with God Himself in
the consummation of His work in the earth through the
ministry of intercessory prayer.

Chapter 16 Quiet
Intercession
One year my two children, Ken and Pat, studied by
correspondence and my family traveled with me. We had a
43 feet long by 8 feet wide mobile home which we pulled
with a pickup truck.
We were in California for a series of meetings when I
was awakened suddenly in the night. I got up and checked
the trailer doors thinking someone had come into the
house. They were locked.
I checked Pat. She was sleeping soundly. I checked
Ken. He was asleep. I came back to our bedroom and my
wife was sleeping soundly.
So I lay down and began to pray in other tongues. I
wasn't loud about it, but I did make expression to it.
The Bible speaks about not disturbing others in a
church service. "If any man speak in an unknown tongue,
let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course;
and let one interpret. But if there be no interpreter, let him
keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself,
and to God" (1 Cor. 14:27,28).
In other words, let him not speak out loud, but speak to
himself and to God. You can sit there and talk to yourself
and God without disturbing anyone. You can either
whisper quietly, or you can pray on the inside of you.
That night, I did make audible sounds, but it was more
of a whisper.
I began to look on the inside of me. And I picked up from
my own spirit—my spirit is indwelled by the Holy Spirit
and it knows things—that something was wrong with
someone in my family.
71

72

The Art of Intercession

I said, "Who is it, Lord? What's wrong?"
Then by an inward intuition—not a voice, but by the
inward intuition that every Christian ought to have, for as
many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the sons of
God, and His Spirit bears witness with our spirit—I knew
some family member's physical life was in danger.
I said, "Lord, I don't know who it is. I don't know for
what to pray as I ought. But I'm going to trust the Holy
Spirit to help me to make intercession." I lay there and
prayed for nearly an hour in other tongues.
Then I had a note of victory. I knew that whatever I was
praying for or about was settled. Very quietly, I sang in
tongues, and laughed, then fell back to sleep.
Now this doesn't happen very often, but just before I
woke up the next morning, I had a dream.
(God does speak to you in dreams sometimes. But let
me say this lest folks get confused. Every time I've ever
had a dream in which God spoke to me, the minute I
awoke, I knew exactly what He was saying to me. If you
think God spoke to you in a dream and you've got to run all
over the country to find somebody to interpret it, forget it.
It wasn't God. God is an intelligent being. You are an
intelligent being. If He can't get over to you what He's
trying to say to you, forget it. Some people think every
little dream they have is God trying to say something to
them. And they're in confusion all the time, trying to
figure out something.)
In this dream I knew I was in Shreveport, Louisiana. I
was standing outside a hotel; I saw the sign giving the
name of the hotel.
Suddenly, I was inside the hotel. My younger brother
was there. (Now although he had been saved and even
filled with the Spirit, he was backslidden and wasn't

Quiet Intercession

73

living for God.) I saw that he took sick after midnight, in
the early hours of morning.
He called the desk to tell them he was sick. Then he
passed out. I saw an ambulance with red lights flashing
come to take him to the hospital.
The scene changed. I was standing up against the wall
in the corridor of a hospital. Across the hall there was a
door. It was closed, but I knew my brother was behind it,
and I knew a doctor was with him.
The doctor came out and shut the door behind him. He
did not look up at me, but walked up in front of me and
said, "He's dead."
In the dream, I said, "No, he's not."
Then the doctor looked up at me and said, "Well, I know
better. I've pronounced too many people dead. He's dead."
I said, "No, he's not."
He said, "How do you know?"
I said, "The Lord Jesus told me."
"Oh," he said, "you're one of those nuts. I'll just show
you."
He whirled around and opened the door. I followed him
inside. A body lay on the table with a sheet pulled over it.
The doctor jerked the sheet down and said, "Just look!"
We looked. And my brother batted his eyes! The doctor
looked closer. My brother was breathing.
The doctor looked at me and said, "You must have
known something I didn't know."
I said, "I surely did."
I woke up knowing that was what I had interceded for.
That happened in May. We went on preaching in
California and finished in August. At the end of August we
returned to our home in Texas, after having been gone 15
months.

74

The Art of Intercession

We hadn't been back home 15 minutes—in fact, Ken
and I were still parking the trailer in the back yard—when
my brother pulled into the drive.
He said to me, "I almost died while you were gone."
I said, "Yes, I know. It was last May, wasn't it?"
"Yes."
I said, "You were in Shreveport in a hotel. You took
sick in the night. You called the operator, then passed out.
They rushed you to the hospital. You were unconscious.
The doctor told you afterwards that he thought for a while
you were dead, didn't he?"
"Yes," he said. "Who told you? Momma?"
I said, "No. I haven't seen Momma. I haven't seen
anyone. We just drove in here 20 minutes ago."
He said, "How did you know?"
I told him my experience.
He said, "That's exactly what happened."
Thank God for praying in tongues! This kind of
praying belongs to us. This kind of praying is important. It
is important to our own spiritual and physical lives. It is
important in intercession for others and for the work of
God in the earth. And it doesn't just belong to preachers.
Sometimes people feel that because they have to be so
quiet about praying in certain places that it is not as
expressive, or not as good, or not as powerful, or not as
productive as otherwise. But it is.
I pray in tongues on airplanes. I pray very quietly, but
it edifies me. It does something for my spirit. Now, I'm not
usually interceding for anyone, but just worshiping God
and building myself up spiritually. Even though I do it
quietly, it is effective.
Likewise, my intercessory prayer for my brother was
just as effective as I lay there on the bed beside my wife,

Quiet Intercession

75

that night in California, praying so quietly it did not
disturb her.
Another time, we were preaching in Oregon. In the
nighttime I was awakened. I thought I heard a door slam.
Just my wife and I were in a smaller travel trailer this
time. I got up and checked the doors; they were locked.
I lay back down and began to check inside my spirit. I
knew prayer was needed, but I had no kind of intuition as
to who or what it was.
I said, "Lord, I don't know what it is. But whatever it is,
or whoever it is, somebody needs help. You said in Romans
8:26 that the Spirit helps us. So help me to make
intercession."
I laid there and prayed very quietly for almost two
hours. My wife slept right on by my side. Then I began to
laugh and sing in tongues. I had a note of victory. I knew
that whatever it was, I had the victory. I fell off to sleep.
I had no dream this time. I had no idea what it was.
Three days later someone came from the trailer park
office saying we had an emergency long distance
telephone call.
It was my sister calling from Texas. At first she was
crying so I couldn't understand what she was saying.
Finally I got her quietened down so I could tell what it was.
She said that Dub, our older brother, had broken his
back. A woman had called her from a hospital in Kansas.
The woman's husband was in the same room with Dub and
he was going home. She was concerned that no one was
there to see after Dub. He'd had an accident. He was in a
cast because of the broken back and he was in a very low
state physically. The doctors said they did not know if he
was going to make it or not.
Oleta said, "I'm going to try to go up there, but I can't

76

The Art of Intercession

stay. What are we going to do? Can you come?"
I realized that was what I'd been praying about. And I
knew I had the answer. How did I know? I just knew. I
didn't have any witness, but I just knew.
I said, "Oleta, just forget it. Don't even go up there to
see about him. He's going to make it. His back will be all
right. I've already got the answer. In fact, he'll be home in
a few days."
And that's what happened. With the doctors telling
him he couldn't do it, Dub got up three days later and went
to Texas. He was in our home when we got back.
I didn't even know for whom I was praying that night—
but the Spirit of God knew.
I did know that I was to pray.
Now I wake up every night and spend time talking in
tongues. But I'm not praying about anybody else. I'm just
fellowshiping with the Lord. I'm just communing with the
Lord. I'm just worshiping the Lord. I'm just edifying my
spirit. I'm just building myself up. But when I am
awakened to make intercession, whether or not I know
what it is about, I know it.
Usually, I lie there quietly and intercede as I have
shown you.
Some have asked, "Can you pray in tongues through
your mind and never say anything?"
Actually, that's not praying in tongues—that's
thinking in tongues.
You have to say it to pray. You may say it within
yourself, but it isn't saying it in your mind, it is saying it in
your spirit.
You may say it very quietly, but you are still saying it.
And it is effective.

Chapter 17
Not-So-Quiet Intercession
There are times of intercession that you are almost
forced into saying it out loud. Such pressure builds up
within, it seems like if you don't say it, you will burst.
My wife and I married in November 1938.1 pastored a
little Full Gospel church. They had no parsonage. I'd been
renting a room and boarding with one of the members.
My father-in-law, a farmer in the community, said,
"When you get married, move in here. We've got plenty of
room and you won't have to pay room and board. This will
help you get started in life."
Four days after we were married, I moved my
belongings into their big farmhouse.
About 9:30 that night, my father-in-law said, "Let's
have family prayer."
They were Methodists. They were attending the Full
Gospel church when I came to pastor it, but they were not
"Pentecostal."
We all prayed out loud in English. They weren't very
loud. And I was trying to be quiet.
I kept having an "urge" to pray in tongues and I didn't
know whether or not they would like that. But it just kept
building, and building, and building inside me, until
finally I just threw caution to the wind, lifted my voice and
prayed aloud in other tongues as hard and fast as I could.
I kept my eyes tightly shut because I didn't want to see
them. I just went after it. I groaned and talked in tongues.
I know I could have kept from it to begin with, but once
you yield to the Spirit, then it seems like you almost can't
help it.
After about 45 minutes of praying that way, the Lord
77

78

The Art of Intercession

spoke to me. Only I didn't know it was the Lord.
You see, I'd been filled with the Holy Spirit less than
two years. And all they taught us in Pentecostal circles in
those days was, get saved and baptized with the Holy
Ghost. Then they turned you loose. We just had to stumble
upon anything beyond that.
But I realize now that it was the Lord who spoke these
words to me, "Lay your hand on your wife and I'll fill her
with the Holy Ghost."
I thought, Well, what if I were to lay my hand on her and
nothing happened?
So I just kept praying, thinking that would go away.
Again it came, "Lay your hand on your wife and I'll fill
her with the Holy Ghost."
I ignored it and went on praying.
The third time, "Lay your hand on your wife and I'll fill
her with the Holy Ghost."
I opened my eyes and looked at my father-in-law
kneeling to my right, and then to my wife, kneeling to my
left, and then to my mother-in-law, on the other side of my
wife.
I know what I said is unbelief, but God will put up with
a little unbelief in you when you don't know any better.
But you can't get by with that later on. This was new to me.
I said, "It won't hurt to try it."
Then I reached my left hand out and laid it on top of her
head.
She had no instructions. She never sought the baptism
in the Holy Spirit a day in her life. I didn't tell her to do
anything. I just laid my hand on top of her head and the
minute I touched her, she lifted both hands automatically
and started talking fluently in tongues.
I looked at my watch to see what time it was. She

Not-So-Quiet Intercession

79

talked in tongues an hour and a half and sang three songs
in other tongues. We had Pentecost in that Methodist
home!
About midnight the Spirit of God spoke to me in the
same voice and told me how to deal with my mother-in-law
and she'd be healed. She had a double goiter. She had her
suitcase packed to enter the hospital the next morning to
undergo surgery.
She had no faith for healing. That is obvious. She
wouldn't have had her suitcase packed to go to the hospital
if she expected to be healed.
But the Spirit of the Lord told me what to do and that
she'd be healed.
I did. He did. And she was. She never had the
operation.
I realized afterwards what actually happened that
night. What I was doing in the spirit was making
intercession for my wife and for my mother-in-law.
The Spirit of God gave me intercession first. I was
interceding for them. I prayed as hard and fast as I could in
other tongues and with groanings for from 45 to 50
minutes. I concluded by singing in tongues and laughing
in the spirit. About that time is when the Lord by the
Spirit said, "Lay your hand on your wife and I'll fill her."
Then He told me how to deal with my mother-in-law and
that part of the goiter on the outside went down like you'd
stuck a pin in a balloon.

Chapter 18
Boldness
Let us therefore come BOLDLY unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need.
—Hebrews 4:16
Effective intercession involves boldness. We
come before God's throne with boldness. Where
do we get boldness? In Jesus!
EPHESIANS 3:11,12
11 According to the eternal purpose
which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:
12 In whom we have boldness and
with
confidence by the faith of him.

access

There are many things you do not need to pray for—but
it is all right to pray for boldness. You should, in fact.
For example, you do not need to pray for faith. The
Bible says, ". . . faith cometh by hearing and hearing by
the word of God" (Rom. 10:17).
So you know how to get faith. Faith is increased by
feeding it on God's Word and by exercising it. We do not
need to pray for faith.
But the Bible does show us that we can pray for
boldness.
Peter and John were bold when they used the Name of
Jesus to minister to the lame man at the gate called
Beautiful. They were bold when they proclaimed the
Name of Jesus to the crowd that gathered.
The Jewish authorities noticed their boldness and took
them in for questioning (Acts 4:13). They commanded
81

82

The Art of Intercession

them to preach and teach no more in the Name of Jesus.
Being let go, they went to their own company and
reported all the chief priests and elders had said to them.
Then the whole company of believers lifted up their voice
with one accord in prayer unto God.
ACTS 4:29,30
29 And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and
grant unto thy servants, that WITH ALL BOLDNESS
they may speak thy word,
30 By stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that
signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy
holy child Jesus.

That prayer was answered!
ACTS 4:31
31 And when they had prayed, the place was shaken
where they were assembled together; and they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word
of God with BOLDNESS.

Paul asked the church at Ephesus to pray for him. This
great man of God, this apostle of faith, this man who wrote
half the New Testament, said, "Praying always . . . for all
the saints; And for me, that utterance may be given unto
me, that I may open my mouth BOLDLY, to make known
the mystery of the gospel, For which I am an ambassador
in bonds: that therein I may speak BOLDLY, as I ought to
speak" (Eph. 6:18-21).
The Ephesians' prayer for Paul would have been an
intercessory prayer.
Boldness to Act
We need boldness to act. Sometimes during intercession
the Holy Spirit may bid us to go to the one we are
interceding for. I now refer to an incident in the life of a

Boldness

83

great intercessor, Charlie Hollandsworth of Spokane. One
day he entered into intercession for someone. He did not
know for whom he was interceding. After a time of
agonizing in the Spirit he was bidden of the Spirit to go to
the Monroe Street Bridge. He hurried to the bridge without
delay. As he arrived, in the middle of the bridge the Holy
Spirit pointed out a man with one leg over the railing ready
to jump to his death. Charlie stopped the car quickly and
grabbed the man. He persuaded the man to get into his car.
He drove the man out into the country where they could
be alone. It took between two and three hours to get the man
to accept the Lord Jesus as His Saviour.
—Reidt

We may not know for what to pray . . . But, thank God,
the Holy Spirit does. We need boldness to act on God's
Word. We need boldness to act on what the Spirit of God
may say to us.
I can sense the Spirit of God searching through the
Church trying to find intercessors whom He can trust to
pray and to act with boldness. He needs them.
Many people have jobs and duties which do not allow
them to give themselves wholeheartedly to intercession.
Yet I have found that as you go about doing whatever you
have to do, on the inside of you, you can be praying.
God will not lay a burden of intercession upon you
unless you are available to move. He might move on you to
pray for someone while you are working if the work is such
that you can pray.
—Reidt

There are jobs where it would be very difficult for you
to pray while working. So God would have to seek out
someone else.
But there are some jobs—particularly if you are not

84

The Art of Intercession

working with your mind, but with your hands, etc.—
where you could give yourself to prayer even while you're
working.
Don't throw off that burden to pray when it comes. Be
bold to act on it.
One day while I was still pastoring, I was driving along
attending to some business and visiting people. Suddenly,
I had an urge to pray for my younger brother. He was
backslidden at the time and was not walking with the
Lord. An alarm went off within me.
So I went along praying on the inside of me, even while
I was talking to other people—on the inside of me
something was reaching out to God on his behalf.
I carried that thing around with me two or three days
until it just lifted. I didn't know what it concerned.
Later on, in conversation, my brother said to me, "I'll
tell you one thing, the Lord sure helped me the other day."
He is a businessman, but he owned a ranch. He told me
how he was out on the ranch when a 5-gallon can of
gasoline he was holding in his hand exploded. He was not
the least bit hurt.
He said everyone who saw it was amazed.
The ranch manager said, "That beats anything I ever
saw in my life. I can't believe what I saw."
But three days before it happened, I was praying. I am
satisfied that if I had thrown that off and not yielded to it,
he could have been severely burned and perhaps killed.
You see, God didn't want him to leave here in that
backslidden condition.
What if I hadn't prayed?
What if Charlie Hollandsworth hadn't been responsive
to the Spirit of God? What if he hadn't interceded when he
didn't know who he was interceding for? What if he had

Boldness

85

been too busy, or unresponsive to the leading of the Spirit
to rush out to that bridge not even knowing why he was
going?
In all probability, that man would have been in hell.
It's a sobering thought that when men come before the
judgment bar of God, there may be some people in hell who
will point to us and say, "You are responsible."
Boldness Before the Throne
ISAIAH 43:25,26
25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
26 Put me in remembrance: let us plead together:
declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

Here is a challenge from the covenant-keeping God to
Israel. It is also a challenge to the Church. For if God kept
His covenant with them, He will keep His covenant with
us.
The believer has covenant rights in prayer, as well as
other covenant rights.
Yet there is one outstanding problem that defeats
believers in their prayer life. When we come to God, we
have a feeling of inferiority, a sense of sin-consciousness,
because we know we have failed. We have a guilt complex.
Some begin their prayers with, "I'm so weak and
unworthy," and then harp on it throughout the prayer.
And when they come into the presence of God telling
Him that, they talk themselves out of faith and into
condemnation.
They don't know whether God hears them or not. All
they do is beg for crumbs.
But look at what God said. "I, even I, am he that blotteth

86

The Art of Intercession

out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins."
Why did he say He would blot out our transgressions?
For His own sake—so He could bless us. He couldn't have
blessed us without it.
When we know that He blotted out our sin, that He
doesn't even remember that we ever did anything wrong,
we can come to Him with confidence. We can come with
faith. We lose sin-consciousness—and now we have
Son-consciousness!
We don't have to sit on a curbstone out in front of our
mansion, begging for favors. We can come in boldly
through the front door and enter the throne room to
fellowship with Him.
We are sons of God. We are joint heirs with Jesus
Christ. We are covenant people. We have a legal right. A
Gospel right. A son right. A family right. A Body right to
enter the throne room.
When Jesus went into the presence of the Father, He
didn't go in with just His head, leaving His little finger
outside saying, "Oh, I'm embarrassed." No! He didn't have
any condemnation even in His little finger.
We are the Body of Christ. That means the Body can go
into the presence of God the Father with the same
confidence and the same assurance that the Head can!
Boldly!

Chapter 19
Fervency
JAMES 5:16,17 (Worrell)
16... A righteous man's inwrought supplication
avails much.
17 Elijah was a man of like nature with us; and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained
not on the earth for three years and six months; and
again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the
earth brought forth its fruit.

Effective intercession involves fervency.
The Bible teaches that we are always to be "fervent in
spirit" (Rom. 12:11).
W. E. Vine says the word translated "fervent" in
Romans 12:11 means, to be hot, to boil. Strong's
Concordance adds that figuratively it means to be earnest.
Epaphrus was "laboring fervently" for the Colossians
in prayers (Col. 4:12). The Greek word AGONIZOMAI
translated "laboring fervently" indicates a striving, a
wrestling. Ephesians 6:12 is a part of this struggle.

87

Chapter 20
Desire
God . . . comforted us by the coming of Titus;
And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you,
when he told us your EARNEST DESIRE, your
mourning, your FERVENT mind toward me; so
that I rejoiced the more.
—2 Corinthians 7:6,7
The Corinthians' "earnest desire" was recognized by
Titus and conveyed to Paul.
Something happens when the real God-cry, the real
God-prayer, and the real God-yearning gets a hold of our
spirit.
God lays it on your heart to intercede, then this [burden,
or whatever it is God has laid on your heart] should be the
paramount issue of your heart.
When the desire to see the answer come is intensified so
that it absorbs all the energies, then the time for the
fulfillment is not far away.
This is the desire that brings the answer. It is creative
desire.
—Reidt

In the winter of 1942 and 1943,1 found myself taken up
with a desire for God to move. I did not conjure it up—it
was put there, no doubt, by God.
You see, what is happening in the move of the Spirit of
God—revivals and so forth—doesn't come as the result of
somebody's praying yesterday or even last week. It is the
result of the intercessions of yesteryear.
That winter of '42 and '43 I was pastor of a church in
East Texas when I found myself so taken up, and so
burdened, praying along certain lines.
89

90

The Art of Intercession

During those war years it seemed as though many of
our churches dried up. People were busy going to war, or
working in war plants, and so forth. In our Pentecostal
churches we had an abundance of tongues and interpretations, but seldom, if ever, did we see any other gifts or
manifestations of the Spirit.
I found myself almost unconsciously praying, "Dear
Lord, may the more mighty gifts and manifestations of the
Spirit come into manifestation and operation . . . the gift
of special faith ... the working of miracles ... the gifts of
healings . .. . "
I was so taken up with that, I would wake up in the
living room on my knees at 3 or 4 o'clock in the morning
praying that. Night after night, it was a common
occurrence. Many times I would have been awakened
earlier in the night. I'd get out of the bedroom so I wouldn't
disturb my wife. (I do a lot of praying quietly and
privately, but I couldn't be quiet about this. It seemed as if
I were going to burst.) But other times, I wouldn't
remember getting up. I would come awake and say to
myself, How did I get here?
I would awake and find myself unconsciously praying,
"May these greater, more mighty manifestations of your
Spirit come into operation ... . "
Then on the 23rd day of February 1943, after praying
that day for 5 hours and 45 minutes, God began to say
something to me. I got my pencil and wrote it down. He
said, "At the close of World War II, there will come a
revival of divine healing to America."
That was more than two years before the war was over.
The war wasn't over until August 1945; this happened in
1943.
Nineteen months later, in September 1944, I was

Desire

91

speaking at a Christ's Ambassadors Rally for the
Assemblies of God. I started out on another subject, but
because this was burning inside me, I got over on this
subject and told what the Lord had said to me.
I said, "I want to give you a preview of what is going to
happen when the war is over. There is coming a revival of
divine healing to America."
When I said that, the power of God fell on that crowd.
Every minister, just like somebody told them to (and I did
not), got up and ran to the altar. Every person hit the floor.
I had never seen such a sight in my life.
Thank God for the Spirit of God. Thank God for prayer.
That revival of divine healing came. It started in 1947.
But it didn't come because somebody had prayed the week
before in 1947. It came because people—not just me, but
others—were praying back in 1943.
When I was praying about it, it was a consuming
desire. I did not care or even suspect that God would use
me in it. I didn't really even want Him to use me. It would
suit me just fine if I was behind the scenes where I could
pray and nobody ever saw me.
God carries out His will upon the earth through the
Church.
What if people had not responded to that burden?
Where did it come from, anyhow? Did we conjure it up
ourselves? No! God laid it on our hearts. It was a
consuming desire.
What if we hadn't responded? We didn't have to. We're
not robots.
God doesn't make us do anything. We have a will of our
own. We have to will to respond to the Spirit of God. God's
Spirit doesn't use force. If He did, He'd make everybody get
saved today and we'd go into the Millennium tomorrow.

92

The Art of Intercession

It is the devil and demons that drive, and force, and
make people.
The Holy Spirit leads and guides; He will give a gentle
push.
Be determined to respond to the Spirit of God. Respond
to those urges to pray. Sometimes there is a leading;
sometimes there is a burden.
Become sensitive to Him.
Sometimes we're insensitive to what He's saying in our
spirits, because we live too much in the mental realm. And
we pass by these things.
Some may object to having something become the
supreme desire of the heart for a time. They say your
supreme desire should be for the Lord.
—Reidt

When God lays that desire on your heart, that is your
supreme desire for the Lord. God dwells in you. And He is
the One who activates the desire. It is God's supreme
desire for people to be delivered.
It was God's supreme desire that that man not jump off
the bridge and commit suicide. The man happened to be
where God could find someone to start praying—someone
close enough to respond to the Spirit of God and get in his
car and drive out there. The man's life was saved and he
was born again, because a child of God let God's supreme
desire become his supreme desire.
God is not halfhearted about anything. Since it is His
supreme desire, it also becomes the supreme desire of the
one called on to intercede. It is cooperation with God. "For
we are labourers together with God .. . . " (1 Cor. 3:9).
—Reidt

Chapter 21
Perseverance
Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for
all saints.
—Ephesians 6:18
Effective intercessory prayer must have in it the
element of perseverance. Wilford Reidt sums it up well:
When the Holy Spirit lays it upon a person's heart to
intercede, the intercession should not stop until the answer
is given or the burden lifted. In my experience where for the
most part I do not know for whom I am interceding, I have
had burdens last for hours and even days. I had to do usual
work, but all the time there was that inner groaning in my
spirit. The times when I had opportunity to get alone with
God, the burden intensified. There is no rule to follow. Each
person will do as God directs.
The reason "persistence" is an ingredient of intercession
is that it is easy to throw off a burden and forget it. It is an
awesome responsibility to feel that someone's life may
depend on your intercession. Not many believers are willing to accept it. So those that are willing are usually kept
very busy.

93

Chapter 22
Intercession Against Sin
And lest, when I come again, my God will
humble me among you, and that I shall bewail
many which have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness and fornication and
lasciviousness which they have committed.
—2 Corinthians 12:21
We have already seen that we are to travail in birth
again when necessary for Christ to be formed in believers.
Paul here said that he would "bewail" many who have
sinned and have not repented. We need to make intercession for those who have sinned and not repented.
Corinth was one of the most licentious and immoral
cities in that part of the world. The same spirits that
prevailed in the city got into the church. When Paul
named uncleanness, fornication, and lasciviousness, he
was talking about sexual impurities. People in the church
had done these things and had not repented.
The Greek word translated "bewail" means to grieve—
the feeling or the act. Here it includes both the feeling and
the act. The act being a response in intercessory prayer.
Worrell's translation sheds light on Paul's meaning.
2 CORINTHIANS 12:21 (Worrell)
21 Lest, when I come again, my God should humble me
before you, and I should mourn for many of those who
have heretofore sinned, and repented not of the
uncleanness, and fornication and lasciviousness
which they practiced.

We live in a world and an age of permissiveness and
95

96

The Art of Intercession

immorality. Many things such as homosexuality, living
together without marriage, and all uncleanness along
these lines have come out of hiding.
The Church seems to have winked at some of these
things. But we are to feel toward sin just like God does.
Sin is a violation of the will of God. God is perpetually at
war with sin. We use sin in its broad form that includes
iniquity and transgression (1 John 3:4; 5:17). Sin leads to
death (James 1:13-15). Death is separation from God. We
are not talking of physical death.
Sin is a hideous thing. Some men of God have expressed
their feelings about it in strong language. Chrysostom
(347-407 A.D.) said, "I preach and think it is more bitter to
sin against Christ than to suffer the torments of hell."
Anselem (11th century) said, "If hell were on one side, and
sin on the other, I would rather leap into hell than willingly
sin against my God."
Where are the heroes, "Who resist unto blood, striving
against sin?" (Heb. 12:4).
.. . We only know God's estimate of sin by the
magnitude of the sacrifice He has provided to atone for it,
His Son!
—Reidt
2 CORINTHIANS 5:10,11
10 For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ; that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be
good or bad.
11 Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men ___

God is love. I preach faith—and faith works by love—so
I have to preach love. But if we are not careful, we preach
in such a manner that people forget God is also a God of
judgment. He is also a God of justice. Sin has a penalty.

Intercession Against Sin

97

Paul grieved over the Corinthian Christians who had
sinned and had not repented. No wonder. We should be
grieved for those among us who are in the same situation.
Wilford Reidt said, "The awfulness of sin and its
consequences should cause us to intercede for men."
Then, too, in the category of sin, God supplied a list in
Revelation 21:8. He listed fear and unbelief at the top of
the list—even before murder.
Seeing our brethren caught up in these snares of fear,
unbelief, doubt, unforgiveness, worry, and so forth should
compel us to intercede for them.

Chapter 23
Intercession for Deliverance
Finally, brethren, pray for us that the word of
the Lord may have free course, and be glorified,
even as it is with you: AND THAT WE MAYBE
DELIVERED from unreasonable and wicked
men: for all men have not faith. But the Lord is
faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil.
—2 Thessalonians 3:1-3
"Pray for us that we may be delivered
The Thessalonicans carrying out Paul's prayer request
would have been interceding for another—for Paul—for
his deliverance and protection.
Many are the accounts I know of first hand—some from
our own experience and others from people we know—
where because of intercession people were delivered.
Wilford Reidt knew personally a mother God
awakened at 2 o'clock in the morning to pray for her son.
She knew from the urgency of the Spirit that something
was seriously wrong. She did not quench that urgency, but
yielded to it. She earnestly gave herself to intercession
until the burden lifted. Later she learned that at the
moment God called her to intercede, the ship her son was
on was struck by lightning. The medics on the warship laid
her son out for dead—and put his body with others in a
place for the dead. He surprised them some time later by
reviving. He is alive today because his mother prayed.
I heard Brother T., an old-time Pentecostal minister
and missionary, tell something that happened when he
and his wife, Blanche, were in Africa as missionaries.
99

100

The Art of Intercession

His wife's parents lived on a farm in the New England
states. Her father had been an unsaved alcoholic, dying
with cirrhosis of the liver, when he was carried into one of
Sister Woodworth-Etter's meetings and marvelously
healed, saved, and filled with the Holy Spirit.
At the time of this happening, his daughter and
son-in-law were in Africa as missionaries. Before sunup
one morning he headed for the barn to milk the cows.
Halfway between the barn and the house at about 5
o'clock, he set down the milk pails and came back into
the kitchen.
His wife looked up from cooking breakfast. "What's
wrong? You look pale. Are you sick?"
He said, "No, I'm not sick."
She said, "What's the matter?"
He said, "I don't know what it is, but something's
wrong with Blanche. Her life is in danger. Let's pray."
He fell down on the kitchen floor and began to groan in
the spirit and pray with tongues.
Six o'clock came. He still was praying.
Seven o'clock came. He still was praying.
Eight o'clock. The cows were lowing. The chicks were
cackling; the pigs were squealing; they hadn't been fed.
Still he prayed, groaning and agonizing.
Nine o'clock. Ten o'clock. Eleven o'clock. Old Brother
G., 82 years old, still hadn't gotten up from the floor.
Twelve o'clock. One o'clock. He still prayed.
Two o'clock in the afternoon. Nine hours without
stopping, groaning, crying, and praying. Then at two
o'clock the burden lifted. He laughed and sang in tongues.
"Whatever it is," he said to his wife praying with him,
"we've got it!"
Communications were not what they are today. In the
process of time, a letter came by boat from Africa.

Intercession for Deliverance

101

I heard Brother T. tell what he'd written in that letter.
"I wrote to tell them that Blanche contracted a tropical
fever," he said.
It was one that when you got it, you did not survive.
He told how Blanche had indeed gone right down to the
place of death. In fact, she was left for dead. But suddenly,
she rose up well!
Eventually, they compared notes. Allowing for the
difference in time, the exact time she rose up well was at 2
o'clock, when the burden left her father.
He had wrestled with it nine hours. That's persistence.
He had refused to give up until the burden lifted.
Now—here is something many have missed. God help
us to see it.
Let me say it again, we emphasize faith and the prayer
of faith endeavoring to get people to believe God "now" for
their own individual healing. But we do not mean to leave
the impression that that is the only kind of praying.
In crusades and seminars, for example, we endeavor to
get people to the position of faith right now to receive their
own immediate needs. We are dealing with people who are
there for their own individual needs.
The laws that govern the operation of the prayer of faith
do not govern the operation of the prayer of intercession.
The prayer of faith is prayed primarily for yourself.
It is not often you can pray the prayer of faith for
someone else—unless they are bona fide baby Christians.
You can carry them temporarily on your faith, in some
instances.
If Brother G. had not known something about
intercession—if he had simply heard about the prayer of
faith, which is right and legitimate—he might have said to
his wife, "We don't know what it is. But whatever it is, let's

102

The Art of Intercession

just agree that she'll be all right."
That would not have worked. She would have died.
The prayer of faith doesn't always work in every
situation. It isn't designed to—if it were, that would be the
only prayer we'd ever need to pray. We wouldn't need all
the other kinds of praying that the Spirit of God through
the Word encourages people to pray.
I can always pray the prayer of faith for myself. And I
do that. But I cannot always pray the prayer of faith for the
other fellow.
Sometimes I can—if I can get him to agree with me. If
he is not present, how can I get him to agree with me?
Great victories have been won through intercession.
Great battles have been lost because we did not take
time to intercede.
In 1965 I preached a six-week meeting in Oklahoma.
Then I drove back to my home near Dallas to take care of
some business before driving to Kansas City to speak at a
Full Gospel Business Men's banquet.
When I got home I had a burden to pray for someone. I
had the sensation of someone's being thrown from an
automobile. But I had so much business to attend to in a
short time that I got to thinking, I've got to do this, and
that, and the other, and I let it slip by me.
I did pray silently. But I should have taken time to
really get quiet and alone with God to find out, Why is this
coming to me? What is this? I should have taken time to get
over into the spirit out beyond the natural.
It was raining when we left Dallas on Friday. We had
seat belts in the car, but I never wore them. This time, I
fastened my seat belt.
My wife said, "What is it?" She knew I never did that.
I said, "I don't know. I had the sensation of someone's

Intercession for Deliverance

103

being thrown out of the car, and I thought it might be us."
We prayed in a general way and claimed protection.
We spent the night in Tulsa with friends. When we left
on Saturday morning, it still was raining.
Again, I fastened my seat belt because I couldn't get
away from that sensation. I should have taken time to
pray about it, but I did not.
We were in Kansas City on Saturday night, actually
eating the banquet just before I was to speak, when
someone came with the message that I had a long distance
phone call.
I went to the phone. Our son told me that my niece had
had an accident and was thrown through the windshield.
The doctors didn't give her a chance to live.
That's what God was trying to tell me.
We talk about the times we listened—but there are
times we did not. Why hadn't I taken the time? I was too
busy to assume the responsibility.
What an awesome responsibility. Lives oftentimes
hinge on our praying.
What would have happened if I had taken the time to
intercede? She would have avoided that accident.
What did happen? She died at 25 leaving two children,
ages 3 and 5.
In 1939 my wife and I had accepted another pastorate
and had moved away, but we were back in the area where
we'd first lived, visiting her parents.
We went with them to visit a neighboring farmer. He'd
been sickly, but they hadn't discovered exactly what was
wrong. They knew it was serious.
The women were in the house. This man, my
father-in-law, and myself were sitting on the front porch,
talking.
On the inside of me, I had a burden, an agony really, to

104

The Art of Intercession

pray for the man. As he and my father-in-law talked, the
man opened the door by something he said for me to move
right in. But I didn't. I held my peace. Then the
conversation changed. And I never could work it around
again. I said nothing to him about his spiritual welfare.
We spent another day or two with my wife's folks, then
came on home. A couple of days later, my mother-in-law
called and said this man had died.
I regretted for a while that I hadn't followed up on the
leading of the Lord and said something to him. Then I
thought no more about it.
Sunday night, as was our custom, we met at the altar to
pray 15 minutes before the service.
I stepped off the platform, knelt, and had just shut my
eyes when I was in the Spirit. I saw that man. I shall never
forget it. It took me weeks to get away from it. I'd wake up
in the night and see it. I saw this man in hell. I saw the
fires of hell boiling up around him. I heard his screams. I
heard him cry out like the rich man did for water to cool his
tongue.
Then I saw Jesus. He pointed at me and said, "I'm going
to hold you responsible for him. I gave you a burden of
prayer and you didn't pray. I opened the door for you to
talk and you didn't talk."
"Oh, my God!" I cried. With tears, on my knees for an
hour and a half, I repented, crying, "Oh, God. Let that
thing pass from me."
I didn't preach that night. The others didn't know what
was happening.
We should never take an urge to pray lightly. It may
make the difference between life and death to some other
soldier of the cross.
—Reidt

Chapter 24 The
Interceding Body
And whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it. . . .
—1 Corinthians 12:26
Intercessory prayer is the type of suffering that brings
deliverance. We are members one of another. As the Body
of Christ and as members, we should partake in the
healing of each other. We weep with those who weep—
then we rejoice with those who rejoice (Rom. 12:15).
ROMANS 15:1
1 We then that are strong ought to
the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

bear

How do we bear the infirmities of the weak? To answer
that question we must also ask for the meaning of "bear"
and of "infirmities."
"Bear" means to lift with the idea of removing.
"Infirmities" means in this setting "a scruple of conscience." Therefore it is not a physical thing, but something
wrong in their belief.
—Reidt

In the surrounding Scriptures, Paul discussed the fact
that some people felt it was wrong to eat meat, because
sometimes the blood of animals sold in the marketplace for
meat had been offered to idols.
Paul said that there was only one God, and these meats
were not offered to our Father God. But yet, if eating meat
offered to idols would cause his brother to offend, he
wouldn't eat it as long as the world stands. Then he gives
Romans 15:1.
105

106

The Art of Intercession

A scruple of conscience is involved. They are brothers,
but they are weak.
To help them it is necessary to engage in intercessory
prayer for them. This helps pull down the stronghold Satan
has in their life and helps bring about their acceptance of
good teaching that will correct the trouble.
—Reidt

The Ephesian Prayers
Ephesians 1:17-23 and 3:14-21 are Holy Spirit-given
prayers which apply to the Church everywhere.
The turning point in my life came when I prayed them
a thousand times or more for myself. I would kneel, open
my Bible, and say, "Father, I am praying these prayers for
myself. Because they are Spirit-given prayers, this has to
be Your will for me just as it was Your will for the Church
at Ephesus . . . . "
Then I would continue just as the prayers read except
where Paul said, "you," I would substitute "me," like this:
"God, of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, Give
unto 'me' the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Him,
The eyes of'my' understanding being enlightened;
That T may know what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the saints,
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power
to usward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power,
Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the heavenly places . . . ."

The Interceding Body

107

After about six months, the first thing I was praying
for started happening. The revelation of God's Word began
to come.
Now that is how those prayers worked when I prayed
them for myself. The subject of this book is intercessory
prayer—prayer for another. I also have used these same
prayers in intercession for Christians who do not see
certain Bible truths.
I pray these prayers for them every morning and night.
I use their name, like this:
"Lord, I am praying this prayer for Joe. God of our Lord,
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, Give unto Joe the spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him: I pray that
the eyes of Joe's understanding be enlightened; that Joe may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of
the glory of His inheritance in the saints . . . ."

. . . and so on through the two prayers.
I prayed ten days for one relative, morning and night.
With no human teacher talking to him (he was a
Spirit-filled Christian), he wrote me, "It's amazing how
things have opened up to me. I'm beginning to see what
you've been talking about."
You see, God has already blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus (Eph. 1:3).
Some Christians just don't know it, so they can't take
advantage of it. They suffer from the infirmity of not
knowing.
We can pray these prayers in Ephesians for them. It is
necessary to stay with it—morning and night, and more
often if possible.

108

The Art of Intercession

Bearing One Another's Burdens
GALATIANS&2
2 Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law
of Christ

Intercession is involved in bearing one another's
burdens.
Remember that "bear" means to lift with the idea of
removing. Intercessory prayer is one way we can lift with
the idea of removing burdens people are carrying.
People may be carrying heavy burdens caused by hurts
in the past. They may be carrying loads because of the
willful sinning of other saints. They may have some faults
or sins in their lives they are having trouble getting rid of.
Burdens can be any number of things.
They may be having trouble laying aside the weights
(hindrances) that keep them from running a good race
(Heb. 12:1,2). Intercessory prayer can help lift these loads
and weights so they can run in complete freedom.
—Reidt
HEBREWS 12:1,2
1 Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us,
2 Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our
faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the throne of God.

This talks about two things which hinder Christians in
the race we are running—weights and sins. (What may be

The Interceding Body

109

a weight to one, may not be a weight to another.)
We can help fellow believers to run their races better
by helping to lift these burdens through intercessory
prayer. We don't need to criticize them; we need to pray for
them.
When we take our places in intercessory prayer for
each other, we are helping the entire body to come into
maturity.

Chapter 25
Interceding Against
the Powers of Darkness
In the tenth chapter of Daniel, we learn that something
was revealed to Daniel. He went on a partial fast, praying
and seeking God. It was three full weeks, however, before
an angel came with the answer Daniel was seeking.
Daniel's prayer was heard the first day he prayed, the
angel told him:
DANIEL 10:12
12 ... from the first day that thou didst set thine heart
to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God,
thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words.

In the next verse, the angel disclosed the secret of why
it took so long for Daniel's prayer to be answered: "But
THE PRINCE OF THE KINGDOM OF PERSIA
WITHSTOOD ME one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael,
one of the chief princes, came to help me . . . . " (v. 13).
Let's look back at the first verse of this chapter: "In the
third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto
Daniel." These events, then, are dated as having happened
during the third year of the reign of Cyrus, king of Persia.
Cyrus was a man who sat on the throne of the kingdom of
Persia.
But in the 13th verse, the angel said, "the prince of
Persia withstood me." This prince of Persia fought, up in
the heavenlies, against God's message-bearing angel.
Reinforcements—Michael the archangel—had to come to
help the angel get through with that message to Daniel!
This prince of Persia was a spirit being.
Il l

112

The Art of Intercession

We see from this passage of Scripture, among others,
that there is a double kingdom system.
There is a seen kingdom upon the earth with human
rulers. But behind that earthly kingdom (or nation) is an
unseen kingdom with a satanic ruler.
This explains something about the temptation of
Jesus.
LUKE 4:5,6
5 And the devil, taking him [Jesus] up into an high
mountain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the
world in a moment of time.
6 And the devil said unto him, All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of them: FOR THAT IS
DELIVERED UNTO ME; and to whomsoever I will I
give it.

What power is being discussed here? The power of the
nations of this world!
Some have suggested the devil didn't have that power
or authority. If so, wouldn't Jesus have known that and
told him so?
The Bible says this was a temptation. If the devil didn't
have that power and authority, it couldn't have been a
temptation—and the Son of God would have been partner
to a lie and a fraud. But it was a bona fide temptation.
Where, then, did Satan get that authority? Did God
give it to him?
God made the world and the fullness thereof. Then He
made His man Adam. And this is what a lot of people—
including ministers—haven't seen. God said, "Adam, I
give you dominion over all the works of my hands." In one
sense, God was saying, "Adam, you're the god of this
world. You run it." God gave the world to Adam!

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

113

But the New Testament calls Satan the god of this
world (Second Corinthians 4:4). When did Satan become
the god of this world? When Adam sinned. It was when
Adam committed high treason and sold out to Satan.
Notice what Satan said to Jesus: "All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of them [the kingdoms of the world]:
FOR THAT IS DELIVERED UNTO ME. . . . " Who
delivered it to Satan? God didn't. Adam did.
Rulers of Darkness
The angel told Daniel, "Your prayer got through the
very first day." And God hears us the first day we pray, but
we do have to stand sometimes before the answer comes.
It is not God who withholds answers to our prayers—
He sends the answer the minute we pray—there are forces
out in the heavens endeavoring to intercept those answers.
Let's examine Ephesians 6:12. It begins, "For we
wrestle ___ " Who's "we"? The Church. Paul is writing to
the New Testament Church—to believers everywhere.
rr
We wrestle not against flesh and blood . . . ." That's
our trouble. We try to fight, wrestle, and cope with
situations we see, when we're really wrestling against an
unseen power behind the situation. When we understand
that, we'll be successful in our "wrestling."
rr
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, AGAINST THE RULERS
OF THE DARKNESS OF THIS WORLD . . . . "
Rulers of the darkness of this world! Another
Scripture declares, "the whole world lieth in wickedness"
(1 John 5:19). The Amplified translation reads, "and the
whole world (around us) is under the power of the evil
one."
If the whole world lies in wickedness and in darkness,

114

The Art of Intercession

then the devil is ruling the whole world. The devil is ruling
everybody who is unsaved. And he rules! He's not ruling
us, however, because the Bible says that although we're in
the world, we're not of the world. We're children of light,
not darkness.
The Holy Spirit is a gentleman. He will not take any
more territory than you surrender to Him. He'll not
dominate you. He'll not force you.
Demons, on the other hand, use force. We read in the
Bible about them driving people; forcing people.
There's something here that we need to be very careful
of: Anybody who wants to drive, force, and dominate people
is motivated by the spirit of the devil. We see it in religious
circles.
"Rulers of the darkness of this world." Hold this phrase
from Ephesians 6 in your mind while we turn to the Book
of Colossians for a clearer picture still.
COLOSSIANS 1:12
12 Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us
meet [able] to be partakers of the inheritance of the
saints in light.

Notice that expression "in light"!
Now notice the following verse: "Who hath delivered us
from the power of darkness . . . ." The Amplified version
reads, "[The Father] has delivered and drawn us to
Himself out of the control and the dominion of darkness
and has transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of His
love."
You see, the Father has taken us out from under the
control of darkness and the rulers of darkness—the devil,
demons, and evil spirits in Satan's kingdom. This is what
Ephesians 6:12 is talking about.

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

115

It says we "wrestle." We're not wrestling with God.
Who do we wrestle with, then? Ephesians 6:12 says we
wrestle against "principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places."
A marginal note in my King James Version says,
"wicked spirits in the heavenlies." Three heavens are
spoken of in the Bible.
Bible scholars agree that the Apostle Paul was talking
about himself in Second Corinthians 12:2 when he said, "I
knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in
the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot
tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third
heaven."
The first of the three heavens, right above us, is what
we call the atmospheric heaven. Beyond that, away out in
space, are the stars, etc. Then out beyond that is the third
heaven—the Heaven of heavens—where the throne of God
is.
There are wicked spirits in the atmospheric heaven
above us—"in the heavenlies." We get another glimpse of
this fact in the 28th chapter of Ezekiel.
The first 10 verses are a "word of the Lord," a prophetic
message, given through Ezekiel to the prince of Tyrus,
who was lifted up in pride. God said to him through the
Prophet Ezekiel, "yet thou art a man." So this prince of
Tyrus was a man. Angels are not men. Evil spirits are not
men.
In verses 11-19 of the same chapter, another prophetic
word is given through Ezekiel, but this one is addressed to
the king of Tyrus, a being who could not be the prince of
Tyrus, whom God had identified earlier as a man. The
king of Tyrus, therefore, must be a being, a spiritual

116

The Art of Intercession

power, a dark power, behind this kingdom.
EZEKIEL 28:11-15
11 Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me,
saying,
12 Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of
Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God;
Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in
beauty.
13 Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every
precious stone was thy covering... the workmanship
of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in
the day that thou wast created.
14 Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I
have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of
God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the
stones of fire.
15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that
thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.

God was talking about the devil—Lucifer—when He
said, "Thouhast been in Eden the garden of God . . . . "The

prince of Tyrus, a man, couldn't have been there. He
wasn't even born. No, this "king of Tyrus" is not a man; he
is a created being (w. 13,15).
In these two beings—the prince of Tyrus, a man; and
the king of Tyrus, a spirit being, Lucifer himself—the
Bible gives the idea of a natural kingdom upon the earth
dominated by a spiritual kingdom with the same name.
Everything on this earth—every human, every
being—is dominated, ruled, or influenced by spirits in the
unseen world. Even we as Christians are influenced and
led by the Spirit of God. Romans 8:14 says, "For as many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God."
If people could ever understand about this other
world—this spirit worlds—that exists and understand that
it's the world in which God lives—a world that has no

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

117

beginning or end—faith would become an easy thing; a
natural thing.
The reason you can count things done before they
materialize is because they're already done in the spirit
realm. If you'll believe they're done in this realm, they will
be made manifest.
That's the reason Jesus said, rrWhat things soever ye
desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them" (Mark 11:24).
Now I want you to notice something that perhaps you
never noticed before. Let's go back to that sixth chapter of
Ephesians:
EPHESIANS 6:10-18
10 Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might.
11 Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
12 For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places.
13 Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand.
14 Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with
truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;
15 And your feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace;
16 Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked.
17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God:
18 PRAYING always with all prayer and supplication
in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all
perseverance and supplication for all saints.

118

The Art of Intercession

We usually stop reading with the 17th verse. By so
doing, we've taken these verses out of context. There is

more truth in them than we have seen.
Because we do wrestle in our prayer life against
principalities, powers, rulers of the darkness of this world,
and wicked spirits in the heavenlies, the object of taking
on the whole armor of God is so that we can enter into
the prayer life!
Putting on the armor of God and not entering into the
prayer conflict is practically useless!
Christians entering into prayer should never forget
this fact: We have authority in the Name of Jesus against
all powers of darkness!
In the 45 years since I learned to really pray, I've never
prayed a single prayer concerning myself or my own needs
without almost instantly getting the answer.
Why? Because I know how to pray. I know what
belongs to me. I know how to take authority over the devil.
I know how to speak to him and tell him, "Stop your
maneuvers right now!"
The Bible calls us citizens of Heaven. I know how to
demand my rights; however, I can't always demand
another person's rights for him. As an American citizen I
can exercise my right to vote, but I can't exercise your
right to vote. You've got to do that for yourself.
Many times people run around trying to get somebody
else to pray for them. It doesn't always work. That's
because they don't have the authority.
Here's where intercession comes in. We have to
intercede for people who don't know their rights. They
may be honest, sincere, saved for years, and even filled
with the Spirit, but spiritual things remain hidden to
them.

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

119

When praying for others, we may have to take more
time to intercede, because they may be yielding to evil
spirits. Sometimes even Christians yield to evil spirits and
allow them to dominate them.
In praying for my own relatives, I've had to take time to
stand against the devil. I've usually prayed for my
relatives privately, secretly; I haven't said anything to
them.
(That's our trouble: We try to deal with the individual
when we ought to be dealing with the power behind the
problem.)
I've simply said, "I break the power of the devil over
so-and-so!"
Ephesians 6:18 speaks about making supplication "for
all saints." (You see, they don't always know how to pray
for themselves.)
An intercessor is one who takes the place of another.
Interceding in Tongues
One form of intercession is intercession in an unknown
tongue.
1 CORINTHIANS 14:14
14 For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit
prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.

Praying in tongues provides a way for us to pray for
"things we know not"—for things we don't even know
about—for people we don't know.
The Spirit of God can help us make intercession for
people and situations when we don't know how we should
pray "as we ought." We know we should pray, but we don't
know how to pray in many cases.

120

The Art of Intercession

I've come to that place many times. I've said, "Lord, I
know to pray, but not as I ought."
Praying "God bless so-and-so," "God help them," or,
"God do this," seemed inadequate. I've said, "Lord, I'm
going to trust the Holy Spirit to help me make intercession
for this individual or situation." And I begin to pray in
other tongues.
Interceding with the Understanding
We can make intercession with our understanding for
things we know about. I'm convinced we have authority
and power in this area that we've never yet used. Some of
us have gotten into the edge of it.
In 1947, my Sunday School superintendent, an oil field
pumper, fell from on top of the pump house into the engine.
The report came to me that he was dead.
When I arrived on the scene, he was lying on the
ground close to the pump house. An ambulance was
backed up nearby. People were all around. I knelt down
beside Dr. Garrett. He whispered to me, "I thought he was
dead at first. He isn't yet, but he will die soon, and we can't
move him. We'll kill him if we do."
Then the doctor said, "Reverend Hagin, take his wife
aside and prepare her for this."
I took her by the arm and led her to one side—not to
prepare her, however, but to pray with her.
As we moved away from the crowd, she said, "Brother
Hagin, Dr. Garrett doesn't think Daddy will live, does he?"
I said, "No, he doesn't, Sister."
She said, "Isn't it wonderful that you and I have inside
information?" (She meant information inside the Bible!)
I said, "Yes, thank God, we do. We'll pray and he'll
live."

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

121

Well, he kept on living, wrapped in blankets, lying on
the ground. Dr. Garrett remained beside him. Finally he
decided to risk moving him to the hospital. I think he must
have sensed we were holding him there, for he said to me,
"I'm sure we'll never make it to Tyler with him alive, but
we'll put him in the ambulance and try. Reverend Hagin,
you get in and ride with him."
To make a long story short, he did survive the trip.
Three doctors were awaiting him.
I went to the hospital and sat up with him at night. His
wife stayed with him day and night.
The third night about 8 o'clock, one of the doctors said
to me, "Reverend, I'll be honest with you. This is the third
night and he's still in shock. We don't even know the
extent of his injuries. We can't take him to the X-ray room
to find out. If we move him, we'll kill him. We've done
everything we know to do. He's going fast now, and there
just isn't anything we can do."
Back in the room I saw that the man's wife was
growing tired. (The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
When you grow tired physically, it's difficult for your
spirit, your inward man, to continue to dominate.
Especially when you're looking right at the situation.) I
saw her faith was waning. And I knew I had to get her out
of there. I knew he would die if she stayed.
(The reason a lot of people have died is because their
relatives have stayed with them! I've found out why Jesus
sometimes put people out of the room when He was about
to heal the sick.)
I didn't lie to her, but I didn't tell her what the doctor
had told me. I said, "Now, you go rest. I'll call you if there's
any change here. But he'll be all right."
I had to do some spiritual wrestling that night. As long

122

The Art of Intercession

as I was awake and alert, my Sunday School superintendent did fine. But this was the third night I had sat up
myself, and when I'd doze off in the chair, he'd begin to
sleep.
The special duty nurse awakened me as she walked
around the bed to check on him under the oxygen tent.
When I first looked at him, I thought, He's dead! I've gone
to sleep and let the man die right on my hands!
Excitedly, I asked the nurse, "Is he dead?"
"No," she said. "I thought he was. But he'll never live
till I go off duty at 7." It was 2 a.m. then.
I went out into the hall, and I prayed. Very quietly, I
interceded for him. I argued his case. You see, God said:
ISAIAH 43:25,26
25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
26 Put me in remembrance: let us plead together:
declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

"Put me in remembrance." God told us to remind Him of
what He said. This is talking about prayer. "Declare
thou." The marginal note in the King James Version
renders this "set forth your cause." In other words, God
invites us, "Plead your case."
So I simply said in a whisper at 2 a.m. out in the
hospital hallway, "Lord, I'm just not going to let him die!"
And I set forth my case in front of Him.
"Number one," I said, "he's my Sunday School
superintendent. He may not be the best one in the world,
but he's the best one I've ever had. He helps me. He visits
the absentees. He works at it all during the week. And he
helps in a number of other ways.
"Secondly, he puts 30 percent of his income into the
church.

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

123

"Thirdly, he's an influence for God and for good. I've
talked to businessmen downtown. They believe in him;

respect him.
"I need him. I'm the under shepherd, and You're the
Great Shepherd of the Church. What I need, You need.
"Fourthly, the Bible plainly tells us death is an enemy.
It's not of God. It's really of the devil. When the devil is
finally eliminated, death will be eliminated from human
contact. So I just rebuke death and command it to leave
him. I'm not going to let him die!"
I went back into his room, sat down, and again dozed
off. He started dying. I got up and went through it again,
pleading his case. Actually, I went through it four times;
the fourth time at 4 a.m.
At 8 o'clock, the doctor came in, pulled up the oxygen
tent, and began to listen across his chest. After a little he
turned to me and exclaimed, "He's come out of it! He's
come out of it! You know, he might make it now! Get the
stretcher! We'll take him to X-ray."
When they brought him back from X-ray, the same
doctor said to me, "He's got a 50-50 chance."
I just stood there, but inside I was jumping up and
down, thinking, Fifty-fifty chance! What are you talking
about, doctor? He's got a hundred percent chance to make
it! And he did make it.
Now, I never said a word to my wife or anybody else
about the way I had prayed for this man. But the first time
he was back in church, he testified.
First he thanked everybody for their prayers. Then he
said, "Never feel sorry for anybody who dies. The last
thing I remember was falling. I don't even remember
hitting down in the machinery. The next conscious thing I
knew was when I woke up in the hospital. And after I woke

124

The Art of Intercession

up, I never had any pain or hurt.
"But while I was unconscious, I must have died. I went
up to Heaven. I heard an angelic choir. You never heard
such singing in your life.
"I saw Jesus. Jesus came to me. And I was just about to
fall down before Him and tell Him how much I loved Him
when He said, 'You'll have to go back.'
"I said, 'I don't want to go back.'
"Jesus said, 'You'll have to go back to the earth.'
"I said, 'I don't want to go back to the earth.'
"The third time Jesus said, 'You'll have to. Brother
Hagin won't let you come.'
Then Jesus turned, and like you would pull a lace
curtain back from a window, He pulled back a curtain and
I heard Brother Hagin say, 'Lord, I'm not going to let him
die.'
"Jesus said, 'See, he won't let you come.'
"The next thing I knew, I woke up in the hospital," my
Sunday School superintendent concluded.
I had not told him I'd prayed that way. How did he
know? The Lord let him hear me, and told him that was the
reason he couldn't stay in Heaven!
That got me started thinking, 'way back there in 1947,
that we have authority to make intercession which we've
never used.
I believe that at times, without realizing it, we have
taken our place in our covenant in the Name of Jesus and
have made intercession. Without examining the Bible on
the subject, we have thought, That was a great experience
the Lord helped me to have. I might not ever have another
one like it. And that kind of thinking has defeated us.
Three years later when my father-in-law lay dying in
the hospital, I got to thinking about that experience with

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

125

the Sunday School superintendent.
As I stood by his bedside—he was unconscious—I said,
"Lord, I believe I'll just rebuke this death and command it
to leave him. I believe I'll command him to live in Jesus'
Name."
God said in Isaiah 43:26, "Let us plead together." On
the inside of me, the Lord plainly said to me by the Spirit,
"No, don't do it. Don't you do it."
That meant I had the authority to do it!
"Leave him alone and let him die," He said. And the
Lord pled his case. "First, he's 70 years old. All I've
promised you is 70 or 80 years." (That is a minimum. You
can go longer. If you've got more faith, claim more. But
don't settle for anything less.)
"Second," He said, "he's ready to go. Spiritually,
financially, he's got everything ready. He hasn't always
been ready. His finances are in order; all his business is in
order. He'll never have a better time to die than now. So
you leave him alone and let him die."
I said, "All right, Lord, I will under one condition and
one condition only. Bring him out of this death; let him
revive and leave a good testimony so everybody will know
where he went. Then I'll let him go."
I hadn't gotten those words out of my mouth until he
opened his eyes.
"Kenneth," he said, "I'm dying."
I said, "I know it, Mr. Rooker."
He said, "Now, the sooner the better."
I said, "I know that."
He said, "You're going to get those children up here
and let me see them before I go, aren't you?"
I said, "Yes, sir. I'll do it."
Our children were his only grandchildren. I phoned our

126

The Art of Intercession

pastor in Garland, Texas, and asked him to bring the
children over to the hospital in Sherman. Meanwhile, I
talked to the Mother Superior of this Catholic hospital and
asked about bringing small children in.
She said, "Don't pay attention to any rules. That man
should have been dead two days ago. We can't understand
how he's lived. Bring in anybody you want to—it's just a
miracle that he's revived."
So his family, including the little grandchildren,
gathered around his bed. And you'd have thought he was
going on a vacation the next day. He never shed a tear. The
nurses rolled up the head of his bed, and he sat there
laughing and talking.
The next day he lapsed into unconsciousness and
started dying. I stood at the foot of the bed just as death
fastened its final throes upon him.
Suddenly his eyes popped open. He saw me and said,
"My God, Kenneth, I'm dying."
I said, "I know, Mr. Rooker, but you're not afraid to go."
"No," he said. "I'm not afraid."
I said, "Lie back on the pillow and let 'er go."
He lay back, smiled, relaxed, and a light flashed across
his face as he took off. Praise God! (You've got to have faith
to live—but you've got to have faith to die, too.)
It is possible to make intercession and get answers
sometimes which are not always the wisest and the best.
We need to use wisdom—because we do have
authority. I've learned that from experience. I know it
from the Word.
According to the Word, many times what we say, He
will do—because we've got the authority down here.
I am satisfied that if we will just walk in the light of
God's Word and make intercession, we can change the

Interceding Against the Powers of Darkness

127

lives of our loved ones and the life of our nation.
We can hold back the powers of darkness. We can undo
the works of the devil.

Chapter 26
Fasting
And let it be, when these signs are come unto
thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God
is with thee.
—1 Samuel 10:7
In some cases fasting may be necessary. There is no hard
and fast rule. The prayer warrior will do as occasion shall
serve him. If he deems fasting necessary, then fast.
—Reidt

In all the Epistles—the books of the New Testament
written to the Church—not one time do they tell the
Church to fast.
That doesn't mean we should not. Mention is made of
fasting, but no rules are laid down, nor do they even
encourage the Church to fast.
The reason is, there are no hard and fast rules about
it—it is to be done as the occasion arises.
Fasting does not change God. He is the same before you
fast, while you are fasting, and when you get through
fasting.
But fasting will change you. It will help you keep the
flesh under. It will help you become more susceptible to
the Spirit of God.
The Lord may speak to you to fast. He has spoken to me
to fast at special times. I might mention, however, that
never have I been led to fast more than three days at a
time.
129

Chapter 27 Interceding
for Your Nation
I exhort therefore, that, first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks, be made for all men; For kings, and for
all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Saviour; Who will have all men to be saved,
and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.
—1 Timothy 2:1-4
After the final service of our Campmeeting '79, some of
the speakers and others went up to Kenneth Hagin Jr.'s
hotel suite for sandwiches.
As we were talking about the things of God, the Spirit
of God kept moving on me. (Actually, only three times in
my life has the Spirit moved on me in such a measure.)
I said to the others, "Let's pray. The Spirit of God keeps
moving on me."
We prayed. By the Spirit, I ministered to each one
present. Then I was caught up in the spirit of prayer and
intercession. For lack of a better term, I was "lost in the
spirit." I was not unconscious—but I was more conscious of
spiritual things. Spiritual things were more real than the
natural.
I sat with my eyes shut, praying in tongues, for what
proved to be several hours. (It was just after midnight
when we started praying. When it was all over, and I
opened my eyes, it was after 4 a.m. Yet it seemed as if it
had been only 10 or 15 minutes.)
The Lord spoke to me. Among other things, He gave me
131

132

The AH of Intercession

instructions concerning the Prayer and Healing School we
are now holding every weekday on the KHEMA Bible
Training Center campus.
And I saw something. I saw three things coming up out
of the Atlantic Ocean. They looked like three giant black
frogs as large as whales. One was in midair. The other two
had just stuck their heads up out of the water from the
east.
I had seen something similar nine years before.
Jesus said to me, "You saw the same thing in 1970.1
told you then exactly what they were, but you didn't do
what you should have done about it. I told you back in 1970
to pray for the leaders of the nation. What happened
[Watergate and so forth] isn't all the fault of the man who
was then President. I am going to hold the Christians of
this nation responsible. You are the ones who allowed
what happened to your nation. If you had prayed, it never
would have happened. I showed you what was about to
happen. Go back and check . . . . "
(Later, I went back and checked what the Lord had said
to me in 1970 from tapes and manuscripts of a special
meeting we held in October 1970.)
Jesus said to me, "Back in 1970, you saw three similar
dark objects come up out of the Atlantic and leapfrog all
the way across the land. If you and the Christians had done
what you should have done, none of those things would
have happened to your nation. You would not have had the
riots. You would not have had the political disturbances.
Your President would not have made the mistakes he
made. In fact, I am holding the Church responsible for his
mistakes."
I began to weep and cry, "Oh, God!"
"Yes," He said, "I am holding you and the Church

Interceding for Your Nation

133

responsible."
Then He said, "When you tell that to some of the
Christians, they will laugh. But when they stand before
my judgment seat and they receive the condemnation
rather than the man who was then President, they won't
laugh.
"If Christians had done what I told them to do in the
Bible—if they had prayed for the leaders of their nation—
they would have kept the evil spirits from operating."
Then He continued, "Similar things—not the same
things—but similar things are about to happen again. If
you do not pray, they will happen. I am not going to hold
the President responsible for the nation; I am going to hold
the Christians of the nation responsible."
Now, let me explain something—you have to know
how to interpret these things. I saw those three creatures
come up out of the Atlantic Ocean. But that doesn't mean
they rise out of the ocean. From Genesis to Revelation
"seas" and "waters" refer to a multitude of people. Out of
the multitude of people, these things will rise up. Sinners
are dominated by the devil; they're in his kingdom.
Jesus said, "There will arise, unless the Christians
pray, not for the same purpose that the other riots came—
but there will be riots, tumults, and disturbances all
across the nation.
"Second, something is about to happen to the President
that should not happen—and will not happen if you will
pray.
"Third, something is about to happen again that will
bring further trouble in the economic scene, the financial
structure.
"But you can stop all three. You can stop the upheaval
in the social structure. You can stop the upheaval and the

134

The Art of Intercession

activity of the devil in the political scene. You can stop the
devil from disrupting the financial scene of your nation.
"You can change all three through intercessory prayer.
That's one of the main purposes for the classes you are
going to start in the fall."
First Things First
God gave us specific instructions to put first things
first.
"Yes, but," people have said to me, "I'll tell you, as long
as the Democrats are in, it's not going to go." Others have
said, "As long as the Republicans are in . . . . "
If you are party minded first, you will never amount to
much of a Christian. Christians are to put first things first.
The Word says, "I exhort therefore, that, first of
all...."
First! Before you pray for your children, before you
pray for me, before I pray for you, " . . . first of all,

supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks,
be made for all men; For kings, and for all that are in
authority
So we would know who the "all men" are, it says, "For
kings, and for all that are in authority."
First of all, we are to pray for our leaders—for all those
who are in authority in national government, state or
provincial government, and on down to city government.
Why? Go on reading . . . .
" . . . that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty . . . . " That "we" as Christians may
lead a quiet and peaceable life. God is interested in us.
All the kings Paul was instructing them to pray for
were not born again.
Will God bless leaders even though they are not saved?

Interceding for Your Nation

135

Certainly. The Spirit of God would not tell us to pray
for something we could not have. That would be stupid.
Why will He bless them? For one thing, He is
interested in us.
"For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Saviour . . . . " It is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior that we pray first of all for all who are in
authority. It is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior that we lead a quiet and peaceable life.
"Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth." When there is war—when there is
upheaval—when there is turmoil—it is difficult to spread
the Gospel. But when there is peace—when there is
tranquility—then we are free to go and spread the Gospel.
No wonder the devil wants to attack the United States,
for instance. You can go around the world and you will find
that 90 percent of all missionary work is done from
America. If the devil could stop us, he could stop the flow of
God's blessings.
But, blessed be God, he cannot do it!
How are we told to pray for those in authority?
" . . . supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks . . . . "
The prayer of intercession is a prayer for others. This
Scripture is talking about praying for others—for those
who are in authority. An intercessor takes the place of
another, or pleads another's case.
One Bible example is Abraham's intercession for two
cities—Sodom and Gomorrah. Read that account in
Genesis chapter 18.
The Lord said, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing
which I do" (v. 17).
He would not destroy those wicked cities without

136

The Art of Intercession

informing His blood-covenant friend.
Abraham was standing on his blood-covenant rights
when he said to the Lord, "Wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty
righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not
spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? That
be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be
as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right? (w. 23-25).
The Lord said, "If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within
the city, then I will spare the place for THEIR sakes" (v. 26).
Remember what First Timothy 2:2 said, " . . . that WE
may lead a quiet and peaceable life . . . . "?

God said He would spare the whole city for the sake of
50 righteous.
Abraham kept going down in number until he said to
the Lord, "Peradventure ten shall be found there."
And the Lord said, "I will not destroy it for ten's sake"
(v. 32).
Consider the terrible sins that existed in Sodom—yet
God said He would spare the whole place for ten's sake.
You know, this old world would already have been
destroyed if it were not for us Christians. Jesus said, "Ye
are the salt of the earth" (Matt. 5:13).
I am old enough to remember before we had electric
refrigerators. My grandfather killed hogs. He'd put salt on
the meat to preserve it.
This world is bad enough—but if it were not for us
Christians, it would certainly be rotten.
God told Abraham He would spare the cities for the
sake of ten righteous. There are more than ten righteous
persons in America today.

Interceding for Your Nation

137

Some say, "We're going to pot."
No, we're not!
Don't listen to such talk as that.
I believe there are people in America today who will
take their place in prayer just as Abraham did.
Abraham didn't sit around and talk about how wicked
they were and how they were all going to hell. He
interceded on their behalf!
If we will take our place, we can change things.
We have a better covenant based on better promises!
I was in the home of a minister of the Gospel whose
4-year-old son was so misbehaved he embarrassed me, and
even embarrassed my son, who was also 4. Ken said to me
the minute we got into the car, "That boy is awful, isn't
he?"
He talked terribly to his father. When his father picked
him up in his arms, petting him a little to quieten him
down, the boy slapped his cheeks and said, "You old liar.
What you're telling is not so. You're a liar."
This pastor—Full Gospel, Spirit-filled—said to me,
"Well, you know, the Bible says that in the last days,
children will be disobedient to parents."
"Yes," I said, "the Bible also says that the love of many
shall wax cold, but that doesn't mean my love has to wax
cold. And that doesn't mean my children are going to be
disobedient to their parents."
You can sit around and say, "Well, the Bible says that
evil men and seducers will wax worse and worse, deceived
and being deceived. This whole thing is going down. The
love of many shall wax cold," and if you just dwell on that
side, you will grow cold. The devil will take you over and
all your children.
But, you don't have to think along that line.

138

The Art of Intercession

Wake up and realize who you are in Christ. The gates
of hell shall not prevail against the Church! Jesus is the
Head of the Church—not Satan. Jesus is bigger than the
devil. In fact, He already has defeated him. He arose
victorious over him—and His victory is my victory.
Think in line with God's Word and realize that no
matter what the situation, we can do something about it.
EZEKIEL 22:30,31
30 And I sought for a man among them, that should
make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for
the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.
31 Therefore have I poured out mine indignation
upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my
wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon their
heads.

This is God talking. Abraham interceded for two cities.
Here God is talking about an entire nation. If He could
have found ONE man who would have stood in the gap,
who would have interceded on behalf of the nation,
judgment would not have come.
"Well," someone might ask, "if God really wanted to
spare the land, why didn't He just go ahead and do it
anyhow? Isn't He God? If that's His will, why doesn't He go
ahead and do it?"
Go back to First Timothy 2:4. There it says that God
wills that all men come unto the knowledge of the truth.
Why doesn't He just go ahead and make them all be born
again? If He can do anything He wants to do, why doesn't
He do it? Why does He wait for somebody to intercede?
We discussed this in detail in Chapter One, "Why
Pray?"
Satan became the god of this world until Adam's lease
runs out. He is not my god—I am not of this world. But he

Interceding for Your Nation

139

is responsible for the wars between nations, the murders,
the violence that is done in the world.
God will not transgress His own Word. He gave the
lease to Adam. Adam gave it to the devil. It is running out.
But until that time, God can only intervene as Christians
seek His face and ask Him to move.
Satan's authority over matters on the earth can only be
overcome as Christians pray and intercede in the behalf of
their country. God is longing today for someone who will
make up the hedge and stand in the gap before Him for the
land.
Intercession can be made in your known tongue. It can
best be made in other tongues as the Holy Spirit helps you
to make intercession. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you, and
continue to make intercession.
Here is where some people miss it. They don't hear
everything you teach, and they grab some little something
and run off with it. There are some things you can pray the
prayer of faith on—and you pray one prayer and that's the
end of it. You don't have to pray anymore; you just thank
God for the answer. You can do that for salvation, for the
baptism in the Holy Spirit, for healing—for anything God
promised right now. But there are other things you cannot
pray the prayer of faith on. One of them is this scene we are
talking about—continue to pray the prayer of intercession
for the leaders of your nation.

Chapter 28
Reviving the Art
The art of intercession has been virtually lost in the
Church. Early-day Pentecostals knew something about it.
Second-generation Pentecostals knew a little about it.
Third-generation Pentecostals know almost nothing
about it. Charismatics know almost nothing about it.
But for God to accomplish what He desires to
accomplish in the '80s, the art of intercessory prayer will
have to be resurrected.
When I first received the baptism in the Holy Spirit
and came over among Pentecostal people, I accepted the
pastorate of a small Full Gospel church in the black land of
North Central Texas. Most of the congregation were
farmers.
In the fall of the year when they harvested cotton, we
dismissed all services except for Saturday night, Sunday
morning, and Sunday night. On Sunday afternoons, we'd
bring something to eat and gather at someone's house to
eat together.
This particular Sunday we met at my future wife's
house. A dear little lady was there. I had heard of her, but
had never met her. Everyone called her Mother Howard.
They referred to her as "a mother in Israel."
She ate. But as soon as we finished eating, and were
visiting, she asked for a room where she could get off by
herself. She knelt on the bare floor. (I learned that
sometimes she would put a newspaper on the floor and lay
her forehead on it as she prayed all Sunday afternoon
without moving.)
She was a widow. She owned her own home in a
neighboring community. A pastor I knew lived in one side
141

142

The Art of Intercession

of her home with his wife and child.
He said to me, "She makes a business of prayer. She
arises at 4 in the morning. She prays from 4 to 8 every
morning. Then she cooks her a little bite to eat. After that
she puts in another two hours praying. She eats a light
lunch, then she usually conies over to our side of the house
and visits with us a while. By 2 or 3 in the afternoon she
goes back to prayer. Sometimes she prays until midnight.
If the burden is there, she prays all night."
Hers was a ministry of intercession.
She was bom again many years ago in Dallas. Then
they had moved to a town where there was no Full Gospel
church. In fact, there was no Full Gospel church in any city
or town around about.
One by one, town by town, city by city, she took them,
and interceded until a church was built there. Then she
took the next town, and prayed until a church was built
there.
Mother Howard, that little old woman, that beautiful
saint of God, prayed a church into every town, every
village, and every nook of North Texas.
I've thought about how it might be when we all get to
Heaven and the rewards are passed out. The pastors who
built the churches will be ready to step up and get their
reward, but Jesus is going to call Mother Howard up there!
Hers was the ministry that got the job done! No one saw
her. They hardly knew she existed. But she didn't wile her
time visiting and talking on Sunday afternoons. She was
on the job. She literally gave her life for others.
That's what Jesus did. And He is calling for intercessors today.
Here is a ministry—the greatest ministry of all—the
ministry of intercession.

Reviving the Art

143

Do you want to enter the ministry? You don't have to
have a calling. All you have to do is volunteer. He is calling
for volunteers.
(When this was being taught during a recent prayer
seminar on intercession, the Spirit of the Lord moved upon
Dr. Kenneth E. Hagin, and he gave forth this prophetic
utterance:)
You see, I have said—
It has been prophesied by the Spirit of God,
spoken by the Spirit, given by prophecy, given by
tongues and interpretation; men speaking out of
their hearts that burden, that word, that
conviction that was put into their spirits by the
Spirit of God, concerning these days . . .
concerning a great move of God and a great move
of the Spirit. But those things cannot come, even
though that is
the will of God (unless) . . . . You see, God is
speaking forth His will; God is speaking forth His
plan; God is speaking forth His purpose. But, you
see, you are the Body of Christ. That great move of
God that is just waiting there, cannot come unless
the Church gives birth to it. Remember that Paul
writing to the Church at Galatia said, "My little
children of whom I travail in birth again, until
Christ be formed in you."
The way that you will give birth unto the move of
God and unto that which He has planned, that
which is His highest purpose, and will for your
land and for this day— The way you give birth to
it is to bring it about

144

The Art of Intercession

through soul travail and intercessory prayer.
So the Spirit of God is enlisting men and women
today to volunteer to be one of those who will
say, "Lord, You can depend on me to be one of
those
who will sacrifice even the legitimate pleasures
of life, and come aside from fellowship with
others that
they enjoy so much, and spend time on their
face in intercession." He is seeking out those
today who will respond to
Him. Thank God, my heart answers back,
"Lord, I am
one of them. I am one of them." And others
will enlist, and will enter into the
greatest ministry there is—the ministry of
intercession.
And so it shall come. It shall come. The darkness
that hovers on the horizon of time, The darkness
that hovers on the horizon of our
own nation, Will be dispelled and driven back.
For the light of
God will shine through; And the rivers of the
Spirit will flow; And the blessings of God will
come; And it shall break—break upon us like a
mighty
dam has broken.
And the flood waters will rush forth, Sweeping
before them all that is in their path. So the flood
waters of His blessing and His
goodness and His Spirit shall sweep forth like
a mighty flood.

Reviving the Art

145

Not to bring devastating results—but to bring
glorious results. Not to bring death and
destruction—but to bring
Life, and Peace, and Health, and Healing. And
glorious shall be the day thereof. Giving yourself
unto intercession, then you shall
be one who will see the fruits of your labors. So
labor on— Pray on in persistence and in faith. And
the floodgates of His blessings shall be
loosed upon the world and upon this nation. And
it will be so, And it can be so, And it shall be so,
That the Church shall yet see her finest hour in
this time and in this day!

