DESTINY IMAGE BOOKS BY MARK AND PATTI VIRKLER
How to Hear God’s Voice
4 Keys to Hearing God’s Voice
Go Natural!
Naturally Supernatural
Communion with God
Spirit Born Creativity
Counseled by God

© Copyright 2014–Mark and Patti Virkler All rights reserved. This book is
protected by the copyright laws of the United States of America. This book may
not be copied or reprinted for commercial gain or profit. The use of short
quotations or occasional page copying for personal or group study is permitted
and encouraged. Permission will be granted upon request. Unless otherwise
identified, Scripture quotations are taken from the New King James Version.
Copyright © 1982 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Used by permission. All rights
reserved. Scripture quotations marked AMP are taken from the Amplified®
Bible, Copyright © 1954, 1958, 1962, 1964, 1965, 1987 by The Lockman
Foundation. Used by permission. Scripture quotations marked NASB are taken
from the NEW AMERICAN STANDARD BIBLE®, Copyright © 1960,19
62,1963,1968,1971,1972,1973,1975,1977,1995 by The Lockman Foundation.
Used by permission. Scripture quotations marked NIV are taken from the HOLY
BIBLE, NEW INTERNATIONAL VERSION®, Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984,
2011 International Bible Society. Used by permission of Zondervan. All rights
reserved. Please note that Destiny Image’s publishing style capitalizes certain
pronouns in Scripture that refer to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and may
differ from some publishers’ styles. Take note that the name satan and related
names are not capitalized. We choose not to acknowledge him, even to the point
of violating grammatical rules.
DESTINY IMAGE® PUBLISHERS, INC.
P.O. Box 310, Shippensburg, PA 17257-0310
“Promoting Inspired Lives.”
This book and all other Destiny Image and Destiny Image Fiction books are
available at Christian bookstores and distributors worldwide.
Cover Design by: Prodigy Pixel
For more information on foreign distributors, call 717-532-3040.
Reach us on the Internet: www.destinyimage.com.
ISBN 13 TP: 978-0-7684-0511-8
ISBN 13 Ebook: 978-0-7684-0512-5
For Worldwide Distribution, Printed in the U.S.A.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 / 18 17 16 15 14

CONTENTS
Introduction
SECTION ONE: FOUR KEYS TO HEARING GOD’S VOICE
My Sheep Really Do Hear My Voice!
Key #1
Key #2
Key #3
Key #4
SECTION TWO: MEDITATE ON GOD’S VOICE
Your Next Step in Hearing God
Part One: Four Pillars of Biblical Meditation
Part Two: Seven-step Meditation Process
Meditation Journal
SECTION THREE: HEARING GOD THROUGH YOUR DREAMS
Why Are Dreams Important to Us Today?
Seven Reasons We Should Listen to Our Dreams
Dream Dedication
Your Seven-day Dream Journal
Seven Foundational Principles for Dream Interpretation
Revisit Your Seven-day Dream Journal
Dream Journal

INTRODUCTION
Draw near to God and He will
draw near to you (James 4:8).

CHRISTIANITY IS UNIQUE AMONG RELIGIONS. IT ALONE OFFERS a personal
relationship with the Creator beginning here and now and lasting throughout
eternity. Truly, God Himself has given both you and I the ultimate invitation.
Because of Jesus’s work, we are able to hear, know, and enjoy a lifestyle of
communion with an interactive, living God.
We do not embrace a “clockmaker” approach to life, where we acknowledge
some deity who initiated the created order but then stepped back, allowing things
to take their natural course. Throughout history, the Creator has demonstrated
the exact opposite desire—culminating with the redemptive work of Calvary.
Jesus died—yes, to cleanse humankind of sin, but also to remove the barriers
preventing constant communion between Heaven and earth.
Jesus declared, “This is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true
God” (John 17:3, emphasis added). Unfortunately, many in the Church miss the
great blessing of fellowship with our Lord because we have lost the ability to
recognize His voice within us. The work has already been accomplished.
Everything that needed to be done in order for you and I to hear God has already
been finished. Now it is a quest of rediscovery. This is why I wanted to share
this project with you.
It is unique. In fact, it is something that I have long wanted to do, as my vision
is to help the body of Christ hear again. So I invite you to join me on an
interactive journey to hearing God. More than a book of teaching, this project is
more an outlet for your interaction with God. I am going to share some teaching
throughout, but more than anything I want to help you make space in your own
life to hear from God. He longs to speak to you!
That is exactly what this journal has been designed to facilitate. This is not a
strict, “it has to be this way” approach. My only request is that you would
consider the keys and principles shared and ask the Holy Spirit to show you how
to incorporate them into your personal fellowship with God.
Don’t strain. Remember, the great chasm of sin has been removed, which

means you already have access to hear from God. However, many of us miss His
voice simply because we do not know how to practically recognize it. The
following pages are all about helping you tune in to the One who is constantly
speaking.
This journal is divided up into three sections, with each section theme
building on the previous one.

BREAKDOWN
First, we are going to review the 4 Keys to Hearing God’s Voice. These are
the foundational building blocks to your communion with God. Though we have
the promise that “My sheep hear My voice” (John 10:27), too many believers are
starved for that intimate relationship with the Father that alone can satisfy the
desire of their hearts. I was one of those sheep who was deaf to his Shepherd
until the Lord revealed four very simple keys (found in Habakkuk 2:1-2) that
unlocked the treasure of His voice.
Second, we are going to explore what it looks like to Meditate on God’s
Voice. Once we discover how easy it is to hear God’s voice, the question is,
“Now what?” Meditation follows hearing. Remember what Jesus said about
those who hear but do not act on what they hear? The process of hearing from
God is incomplete unless we act upon what we hear. This is not a summons to
religious busyness. For what we are focusing on in these pages, the action is
meditation. Before there is manifestation, I believe there must be meditation.
Our minds must be transformed before we go out and change the world around
us. Otherwise, we are just shooting in the dark or trying to follow some type of
religious system. I will give you a practical, seven-step process on How to
Meditate on a Topic that is simply designed to help you practice biblical
meditation in your everyday life. We must demystify meditation in order to
enjoy its wonderful benefits.
Third—and perhaps the most misunderstood way that God communicates—I
want us to look at Hearing God through Our Dreams. When you recognize the 4
Keys to hearing God’s voice and develop a lifestyle of meditating on what He is
saying, your dream life will increase in activity. Biblical meditation is a
powerful catalyst to experiencing God speaking to you in the night through
dreams, as His Word constantly fills your mind and heart. We must learn how to
be aware of what God is saying, consistently record our dreams, and pray for
discernment and interpretation.
Each section will be introduced by a brief segment of teaching and then will

be followed by plenty of writing space for you to interact with God yourself.

HOW TO ENGAGE
Here is how I recommend you engage the following pages:
1. Sections: I have broken the book up into three sections, simply to
help you identify which unique subjects you will be covering.
2. Entries: The book is not broken up into specific days/weeks, as I
want you to go through this journey at your own pace. However, I do
recommend you go through one entry per day to get the most out of
your experience. Most importantly, I want you to use this journal in a
way that makes the most sense to your personal walk with the Lord.
Freely skip to a section of maximum relevance if need be. For
example, if you have a vivid dream one night and want to record it, I
encourage you to write it down in the appropriate area in Section
Three. There is lined space for recording seven sample dreams.
Likewise, if there is a specific verse you have on your heart that you
would like to meditate on, go directly to Section Two on Biblical
Meditation.
3. “Hearing God in Everyday Life” Stories: Throughout this
journal, I am also including stories and testimonies of those who have
heard God in one of the different ways we are discussing and how
hearing His voice transformed their lives, ushering them into healing,
creativity, and breakthrough.

Section One

FOUR KEYS TO HEARING GOD’S VOICE
My sheep hear My voice (John 10:27).
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
these are sons of God (Romans 8:14).

MY SHEEP REALLY DO HEAR MY VOICE!
INTRODUCING THE 4 KEYS TO HEARING GOD’S VOICE
I tossed and turned in bed, unable to fall asleep. The thought kept going
through my mind: “What if I died tonight? I’m not ready to go to Heaven.” I
could not shake the thought, so I got up, went downstairs, and waited for my
parents to come home from their meeting. When they did, I announced that I
wanted to get saved, and they took me straightway to the pastor’s home where
he explained the plan of salvation and led me in the sinner’s prayer. I was 15
years old when I accepted Jesus Christ into my heart as my Lord and Savior.
It was God’s voice that was speaking to me that night, calling me into His
kingdom. His voice came as a spontaneous thought inside my head. However, I
didn’t define this as the primary way God’s voice is heard until I had completed
a desperate 10-year search to hear Him clearly.
Unfortunately, many in the Church live in that place of straining and
struggling to hear God speak. They miss the great blessing of fellowship with
our Lord because we have lost the ability to recognize His voice. Though John
10:27 promises us that “My sheep hear My voice,” too many believers are
starved for that intimate relationship that alone can satisfy the desire of their
hearts.
I was one of those sheep who was unable to identify the voice of my
Shepherd. I hungered for deeper spiritual intimacy with God, but I could not find
it. Then on the eleventh year of my Christian life, I had the spontaneous thought,
“I should take a year of my life and focus on learning how to hear God’s voice.”
I decided to act on that thought and devote a year to a focused effort—learning
to hear His voice. Unbeknownst to me, it was the Lord Himself calling me to
invest that time.
That year the Lord revealed four simple keys, all found in Habakkuk 2:1-2,
which unlocked the treasure of His voice. Using the 4 Keys together allowed me
to easily hear God’s voice on a daily basis. It was the most transforming step I
have taken in the 45 years of my Christian life! I would like to share them with
you so you can try them and watch as they open your ears to hearing God like
never before.

Key #1

God’s voice in your heart often sounds
like a flow of spontaneous thoughts.

YOU CAN BE CONFIDENT THAT GOD IS
SPEAKING TO YOU
Then the Lord answered me and
said… (Habakkuk 2:2).

THE PROPHET HABAKKUK KNEW THE SOUND OF GOD SPEAKING to him.
• It was clear.
• It was familiar.
• It was recognizable.
As you set out on this journey, pause and consider how clearly you are
currently hearing God’s voice speaking to you.
In what ways do you sense that God currently speaks to you?

When was the last time that you clearly heard God’s voice?

If you believe that you are currently not hearing God’s voice or it has been a
long time since you last heard God speaking to you, prepare for a transition. You
can be confident that God is speaking to you, just as Habakkuk was.
Trust the Lord that soon you will be able to use the same confident language
that the prophet of old did—Then the Lord answered me and said….
Spend a few moments in prayer. Write down what you are asking God to do
in your life during this journey into hearing God’s voice. Be bold, and
remember that the Father in Heaven wants you to hear His voice even more
than you want to hear His voice!

LEARN TO RECOGNIZE THE STILL SMALL
VOICE
…and after the fire a still small
voice (1 Kings 19:12).

GOD SPOKE TO THE PROPHET ELIJAH IN A STILL SMALL voice. He was able to
recognize that, in this instance, God was not speaking in dramatic ways such as
fire, an earthquake, or wind. Just like Elijah was able to clearly recognize the
speaking voice of God, you too can confidently know when and how God is
speaking to you.
Remember, Elijah was a human being just like you and I (see James 5:17-18).
If he could discern the still small voice of God, so can you!

What do you think the “still small voice of God” sounds like?

Have you ever heard God speaking to you in this way? What did it sound
like?

This still small voice is not an audible voice that you hear with your natural
ears—at least not normally. Rather, it is what Paul describes in Romans 8:16,
where he talks about how the “Spirit Himself bears witness with our spirit that
we are children of God.” The Holy Spirit bears witness in your spirit concerning
truth. Most important, He gives you an internal assurance that you are born again
and that you are a child of God.
This is one of the principal ways that God communicates with His people—
through His Spirit bearing witness with your spirit.
Ask the Holy Spirit to give you specific words to describe the process of how
He “bears witness” with your spirit. Write this down and review your

description. Can you think of some recent examples in your life where you
experienced God speaking to you this way?

GOD SPEAKS THROUGH YOUR SPONTANEOUS
THOUGHTS
But as it is written: “Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have
entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared
for those who love Him.” But God has revealed them to us
through His Spirit (1 Corinthians 2:9-10).

HAVE YOU EVER BEEN IN A SITUATION WHERE, AS YOU WENT along with your normal
day, a specific thought came to your mind—a thought that compelled you to
pray? Maybe it was for a certain person or a particular situation.
We may not recognize it immediately, but those seemingly spontaneous
thoughts are vehicles through which God speaks to us. In these instances, God is
speaking to you by sharing His own thoughts with you. Ff

What do these spontaneous thoughts look like to you? Have you
experienced this in your Christian life?

In the last three days, have any of these spontaneous thoughts come to your
mind?

In the Old Covenant, the thoughts of God were a mystery (see Isa. 55:8-9). In
the New Covenant, we are given the opportunity to actually know the thoughts
of God as the Holy Spirit reveals them to us. When you experience spontaneous
thoughts that lead you to pray, be confident that God is at work. He is speaking
to you. He is inviting you to know His thoughts and actually partner with Him in
praying for His will and His purposes over what He is revealing to you.
Pause and pray. Perhaps God wants to reveal His thoughts to you in this
moment. Write down any spontaneous thoughts that come to your mind

about specific people or situations that you could pray for.

SPIRIT-LEVEL COMMUNICATION
But if they are prophets, and if the word of the Lord is with them,
let them now make intercession to the Lord of hosts (Jeremiah
27:18).

EXPERIENCE INDICATES THAT WE OFTEN PERCEIVE SPIRIT-LEVEL communication as
spontaneous thoughts, impressions, and visions. One definition of paga, which is
the Hebrew word for intercession, is “a chance encounter or accidental
intersecting.”
This passage from Jeremiah represents a summons for the authentic prophets
of God to stand in the gap and pray on behalf of the “vessels which are left in the
house of the Lord.” Through intercession, God uses “accidental intersections”
and invites us to pray on behalf of someone else, serving as a “go-between.” We
simply need to start recognizing that He speaks this way, rather than discounting
the thoughts as arbitrary, random, or unimportant. Ff

Is there anyone God is “intersecting your path with” today? Make a list of
any people who seem to be coming up in spontaneous thoughts.
You might want to make this list on a separate document in your phone,
tablet, computer, etc. so it will be easily accessible to you.

Pray over each name on your list. Ask the Holy Spirit to give you wisdom,
direction, and specifics as you pray for them.
Your so-called “chance encounters” are actually divinely orchestrated setups
by a God who sees and knows all. He is not only speaking to you, but He is
inviting you into His purposes by using your voice and your intercession as His
method for bringing His plans to pass. You get to play a role in the process as
one who hears God’s voice and releases His words!
Continue to add to this prayer list. Live mindful that God will communicate

with you through seemingly spontaneous thoughts. Ask the Holy Spirit to help
you immediately recognize when He is speaking and train you to pause, listen,
and pray.

Key #2

Become still so you can sense
God’s flow of thoughts.

BE STILL AND LISTEN
I will [in my thinking] stand upon my post of observation and
station myself on the tower or fortress, and will watch to see what
He will say within me (Habakkuk 2:1 AMP).

THE PROPHET HABAKKUK KNEW THAT IN ORDER TO HEAR God’s quiet, inner,
spontaneous thoughts, he had to first go to a quiet place and still his own
thoughts and emotions. Reflect on the language he uses. To Habakkuk, being
still meant a resolution of thought. He had to make an effort to be still. Doesn’t
this make sense in our extremely fast-paced society today? Decide today that
you will be still before the Lord and incline your heart to listen to His voice.
In order to meditate on the words of God (which we will look at in greater
depth later on in our journey together), we must first resolve to hear what God is
speaking. Habakkuk resolved to focus every part of his being—particularly his
mind—to listening to what God was going to say to Him. This involves
intentionally becoming still.
Over the next few days, I want to help you become quiet before the Lord and
start to hear His voice. This does not mean we empty our minds and go blank.
That is how the counterfeit works—eastern meditation. To listen to God is to
wait quietly before Him as He longs to fill our minds with His thoughts and His
Word. Ff

If you had to evaluate the time you spent communicating with God, how
much of it could be described as “being still”?

If you would honestly say that most of your time with God involves you
speaking, get ready for a paradigm change as the Holy Spirit gently leads
you on this journey to becoming still and hearing His voice.
Remember, His is often a still, small voice. In order to hear it, we likewise

need to grow still.

WAIT TO HEAR GOD’S VOICE
My soul, wait silently for God alone, for my expectation is from
Him (Psalms 62:5).

When it comes to prayer, do you talk or listen more?

Pause and honestly evaluate. If you tend to talk more, take this opportunity to
pause, get still/silent before the Lord, and posture your heart in a place of
expectation.
Write down what the Holy Spirit begins to share with you.
(Note any spontaneous/flowing thoughts that come to your mind.)

WRITE DOWN GOD’S THOUGHTS
Truly my soul silently waits for God (Psalms 62:1).

THERE IS A DEEP INNER KNOWING (SPONTANEOUS FLOW) IN our spirits that each of us
can experience when we quiet our flesh and our mind. If we are not still, we will
sense only our own thoughts. However, when we quiet ourselves and set our
expectation to hear from God, then we will not be tempted to simply hear our
own thoughts.

Spend some time in silent waiting before God. What thoughts are coming to
your mind? List them down in the space below.

Now evaluate the different thoughts that you listed. One tell-tale sign that the
thoughts are from God is that they are in alignment with what is already written
in Scripture. God will never violate His Word. What He says to you will always
reflect His nature and character as revealed throughout Scripture.

WORSHIP: A GATEWAY TO HEARING GOD
Then it happened, when the musician played, that the hand of the
Lord came upon him (2 Kings 3:15).

LOVING GOD THROUGH A QUIET WORSHIP SONG IS ONE VERY effective way to
become still. This is not a formula designed to lock you into a method. In other
words, there are times when God invites you into silence where a worship song
might be disruptive. Allow your spirit to identify whether or not this is the right
tool at the right time.
Scripture consistently reveals that worship is a gateway to God’s presence.
When God comes, He speaks to His people. Also, a worship song helps reorient
our minds to focus exclusively on Him. It is a catalyst that pushes distractions to
the side and allows us to gaze upon His beauty.
After I worship and become silent within, I open myself for that spontaneous
flow.
Find a quiet worship song and start to play it. Ask the Holy Spirit to direct
your focus and attention on the true object of your worship—the Father.
As you worship, have ears ready to hear the voice of the Holy Spirit.
• He may speak to you directly through the song.
• He may cause you to write down some of the words and reflect on
them.
• He may invite you to look up Scripture passages that the lyrics are
based upon.

Write down what the Holy Spirit says to you through the worship
experience.

THE ENEMY OF STILLNESS
When the enemy comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord will
lift up a standard against him (Isaiah 59:19).

WHILE YOU ARE INTENTIONALLY SETTING YOURSELF TO HEAR God’s voice, be aware
that the enemy will try to come in like a flood with distracting thoughts. First,
celebrate this. Even though the devil is an annoyance and a nuisance, he is
coming against you because he recognizes the value of your journey to hearing
God’s voice. The very fact that he is coming against you—and it often feels like
a flood—means that you are breaking significant spiritual ground!

Pause a moment and reflect.
What thoughts tend to distract you from growing quiet before God and
listening to His voice? (Examples: condemnation, worry, daily tasks,
unworthiness, etc.)

PRACTICAL TOOLS TO OVERCOME
DISTRACTIONS AND HEAR GOD SPEAK
Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need (Hebrews
4:16).

THE MOST CONSISTENT THOUGHTS THE ENEMY USES TO DISTRACT you from hearing
God’s voice are ones of sin, condemnation, and unworthiness. He wants you to
feel guilty and thus unable to come before God’s throne with boldness. This is a
deception, and you have a scriptural right to come against every one of his lies!
If thoughts of guilt or unworthiness come against you, simply repent, receive
the washing of the blood of the Lamb, and imagine yourself putting on Jesus’s
robe of righteousness. This is truly what enables us to stand spotless before the
Holy God.

Find Scriptures to declare against the deceptions and lies of the enemy.
Here are some example Scriptures that equip you to stand against the enemy’s
lies of unworthiness and shame:
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for He has
clothed me with the garments of salvation, He has covered me with the robe of
righteousness (Isaiah 61:10).
And you, who once were alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now He has reconciled in the body of His flesh through death, to present you
holy, and blameless, and above reproach in His sight (Colossians 1:21-22).
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their
testimony (Revelation 12:11).
Reflect for a moment on what lies the enemy uses to try to distract you from
hearing God’s voice. Ask the Holy Spirit to lead you to certain Scripture
passages that arm you with truth to speak back against him.

Write these down!

KEEP A NOTEBOOK HANDY TO WRITE DOWN
“OTHER THINGS”
AS YOU SPEND TIME LEARNING HOW TO POSTURE YOUR heart to be still before God,
you will find that your mind will start running toward different tasks you need to
perform, errands you need to run, or other tasks you need to be mindful of.
If thoughts come of things you have forgotten to do or need to do, write them
down so you can do them later. Don’t worry about this disrupting the flow of
you hearing from God. In fact, it is very helpful to write these things down and
“shelve” them for later. Once you record them, most likely they will leave your
mind and keep you in a place where you can hear the still voice of God speaking
to you.

Keep a separate notebook ready and available during your time of hearing
from God. This is reserved exclusively for “other things.”
This includes errands, tasks, and duties of any kind—often completely
unrelated to what God is talking to you about.

TRAIN YOUR EYES TO LOOK AT JESUS
And let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us,
fixing our eyes on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of faith
(Hebrews 12:1-2 NIV).

TO RECEIVE THE PURE WORD OF GOD, IT IS VERY IMPORTANT that your heart be
properly focused as you become still. This is because the intuitive flow comes
out of the vision being held before one’s eyes.
If you fix your eyes upon Jesus, the intuitive flow is pure and comes from
Jesus. But if you fix your gaze upon some desire of your heart, the intuitive flow
is affected by that desire. To have a pure flow you must become still and
carefully fix your eyes upon Jesus and Him alone.Ff

Who/what has the object of your attention been during times of prayer and
listening to God’s voice?

You can trust the flow of spontaneous thoughts when your eyes are fixed
upon Jesus. Otherwise, there is a strong likelihood that they are being
influenced by other desires or thoughts.
In your time of prayer today, decide to make Jesus your focus. Based on what
you have learned so far, engage certain practices that help you do this.
• Singing a worship song
• Overcoming certain distractions of the enemy through key Scripture
verses
• Closing your eyes and, based on the visual elements revealed in the
Bible, imagining that you are looking upon Christ
Ask the Holy Spirit to show you what strategy to use in fixing your focus
upon Jesus. Be sure to write down your experience!
Note: This is not intended to be a formulaic approach to hearing God.

However, there are certain practical steps you can take that will help you
maintain a consistent focus on Jesus, become still before God, and position
yourself to hear Him speak to you.
Remember, hearing God is a journey! It is a wonderful adventure and voyage
of glorious discovery, and on the other side is the greatest treasure imaginable—
a lifestyle where you consistently and clearly hear the Creator of all things
speaking directly with you!

Key #3

Fix your eyes upon Jesus and ask to receive visions.

WATCH AND SEE
I will stand my watch…and watch to see what He will say to me
(Habakkuk 2:1).

HABAKKUK SAID, “I WILL WATCH TO SEE.” HABAKKUK WAS actually looking for
a vision as he prayed. The Bible is meant to be lived, so decide that you too will
begin looking with the eyes of your heart into the spirit world to see what you
can see.
This is the biblical inheritance for all believers, as the prophet Joel wrote of
our time, saying:
And it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh;
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams,
your young men shall see visions (Joel 2:28).
Visions are the inheritance of all Christians, because all Christians are filled
with the Holy Spirit. He is the One who gives us eyes to see into the spirit world
and receive visions from Heaven. Ff

What do you currently believe/think about receiving visions from God?

Do you believe this is an experience reserved for a “certain kind of
Christian”?

How do you feel about the truth that all Christians have been given the
ability to receive visions (as this is one of the ways that God speaks to His
people)?

SET THE LORD CONTINUALLY BEFORE YOU
I have set the Lord continually before me; because He is at my
right hand, I will not be shaken (Psalms 16:8 NASB).

TO START EXPERIENCING VISIONS FROM GOD, FOLLOW THE example of King David!
This original Psalm makes it clear that it was a decision of David’s, not a
constant supernatural visitation: “I have set” (literally, I have placed). This
might clear up some of the confusion and mystique concerning visions, as many
people believe they are solely the result of ecstatic, otherworldly experiences.
While visions are undeniably supernatural and can take on different forms or
expressions, one of the key ways to position yourself to see into spirit world is to
make the daily decision to set a clear vision of the Lord ever before your eyes.
Because David knew that the Lord was always with him, he determined in his
spirit to see that truth with the eyes of his heart as he went through life, knowing
that this would keep his faith strong. Ff

What do you think it means to set the Lord continually before you?

Ask the Holy Spirit to give you insight and clarity about this. Then, write
down some practical ways that you can set the Lord before you in your
everyday life.

ONE PICTURE IS WORTH A THOUSAND
WORDS
All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables, and He did
not speak to them without a parable (Matthew 13:34 NASB).

WE OFTEN SAY, “A PICTURE IS WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS.”
This is certainly true because pictures are the language of the heart. We notice
that Jesus used pictures and images constantly as He taught. God still
communicates this way through the “language” of visions.
When we use pictures in our prayer time, fixing our eyes on Jesus, we begin
speaking the language of the heart and this moves us quickly into heart/spirit
realities getting us beyond our mind. Ff

Take a moment and try to picture the Lord.
Don’t go down the standard route here. The end goal is not picturing Jesus
like a natural, physical man like we would see in a movie. Instead, ask the Holy
Spirit to give you certain images that reveal or embody the character of God as
described in Scripture.
What are some specific images that describe and characterize the Lord to
you? Write these down and use them during your time listening to God.

UNLOCK THE POWER OF YOUR GODLY
IMAGINATION
Because He is at my right hand, I will not be shaken (Psalms 16:8
NASB).

DEVELOP A “GODLY IMAGINATION” WHICH PICTURES THE things that God says
are so. In Psalm 16, David sets his eyes to envision a reality that God confirms is
truth. In Matthew 28:20, Jesus reminds us, “I am with you always.” This is a fact
to God, and it should be a fact to us. We need to take what God considers facts
and picture them as our reality.
Obviously, if you are picturing that Jesus is not with you that would be
picturing a lie, which is unwise. Lies originate from the “father of lies,” and
there is no reason for us to be entertaining these false imaginations or pictures in
our minds.
Always see Jesus at your right hand, as David did. Add to this Paul’s prayer
for God to enlighten the eyes of your heart (see Eph. 1:17-18). Then tune to the
flow of the Holy Spirit and watch as He brings the scene alive. You will find that
you can step from these godly imaginations into a divine vision.
Take this moment as your opportunity to imagine realities that God says are
so. This is what develops a godly imagination. Everything we picture and
visualize is based on what is revealed as truth in the Scriptures.
You can even start with the truth that David envisions and sets before his
mind in Psalms 16:8.

Write down several realities that God says are so.
These are the very truths that should provide the foundation for your godly
imagination. When our thinking is underscored by the truths that God says are
so, we are in a safe place to activate the power of godly imagination.

KEEP LOOKING
I kept looking… (Daniel 7:9 NASB).

WE MUST KEEP LOOKING IF WE WANT TO SEE! DANIEL SAW A vision in his mind and
said, “I was looking…I kept looking…I kept looking” (Dan. 7:2,9,13 NASB).
Perseverance is necessary if we desire to press in to receive visions. Daniel
did not give up after one attempt. We need to repent for our tendency to give up
so quickly and start presenting the eyes of our hearts to the Lord. Start looking
again with the expectation of seeing. Consider the encouraging words of Jesus:
“For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who
knocks it will be opened” (Matt. 7:8).
As you pray, look for Jesus. Watch and listen as He speaks to you, revealing
and saying the things that are on His heart. Many Christians will find that if they
will only look they will see flowing pictures in the same way they receive
flowing thoughts. Ff

Why do you think perseverance is so important when it comes to having
visions? What are some ways that you can keep looking in the place of
prayer and listening to God’s voice?

A SAMPLE VISION
“Behold, the virgin shall be with child and shall bear a Son, and
they shall call His name Immanuel,” which translated means,
“God with us” (Matthew 1:23).

TODAY, I WANT TO GIVE YOU A SAMPLE VISION THAT WILL help activate your godly
imagination. Remember, start with truths that God says are so.
Jesus Christ is Emmanuel, God with us (see Matt. 1:23). It is as simple as that.
You can visualize Christ present with you because Christ is present with you. As
believers, it is common for us to walk through our lives quoting certain Bible
truths
Today, I want you to simply grow quiet before the Lord and consider the
powerful reality of Emmanuel. This is not simply a name for God that we bring
out at Christmastime; this is what the Holy Spirit has brought you into as a child
of God. God is with you, for God lives inside of you.

Imagine Christ as forever present with you. He is inside of you. He is with
you always.
As you do this, the vision may come so easily that you will be tempted to
reject it, thinking that it is just you.
But if you persist in recording these flowing pictures, your doubt will soon be
overcome by faith as you recognize that the content of them could only be
birthed by Almighty God.
Write down what pictures, images, thoughts, or visions come to your
mind as you focus on the reality of Emmanuel: God with you.
Note: This is a practice you can start integrating into your everyday walk with
God. It will help you see Bible truths as living realities that are not only meant to
be studied but lived out.

A LIFESTYLE OF ABIDING IN CHRIST
Abide in Me, and I in you (John 15:4).

A LIFESTYLE OF CLEARLY HEARING GOD’S VOICE AND SEEING visions is available for
every single Christian. It is not reserved for the few special elect; it is your
inheritance.
Is it possible for you to live out of divine initiative as Jesus did? Yes! It is
called abiding in Christ (see John 15:4). Fix your eyes upon Jesus. The veil has
been torn, giving you access into the immediate presence of God, and He calls
you to draw near (see Luke 23:45; Heb. 10:19-22).
The reason many people do not receive visions has nothing to do with God’s
willingness; it has everything to do with their picture of what abiding in Christ
looks like. Again, that dividing wall of separation between God and humanity
has been torn down the middle. You have been given access to come boldly into
God’s powerful presence.
Remember, this lifestyle of hearing God is available and much more practical
than many of us think. It all begins with getting a clear vision of Jesus by fixing
our eyes upon Him, visualizing the truths that God says are so, and persevering
in the place of expectant, watchful prayer where we keep looking for what God
wants to show us.
Write down what you envision a lifestyle of abiding in Christ looks like in
your life.

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Entering into Godly Imagination through Journaling and
Dialoguing with God

Doug Sterner shares a powerful testimony of how applying this specific
key to hearing God’s voice brought him into a new level of visions. Review
his story and journaling dialogue with God below:
Once again, I’m excited about the possibility of entering into
dialogue with my God and Savior. I really do long to have
intimate fellowship—real two-way conversation—with Jesus
through the indwelling Holy Spirit. And I really believe it is
possible. I believe it because I have experienced it—again!
Lord, how would You have me use the eyes of my heart?
Child, dear one, when you picture Me in your mind’s eye using
your sanctified imagination, you are coming to Me by faith. It’s
the means I have provided by My Spirit to make our meeting
together real to you. It’s just a means to an end—a way to
consciously be with Me by faith.
You already know in your head that I’m with you, but that’s not
always enough, is it? You want to feel Me; you want to
experience Me. You want to feel My touch and really know Me.
By opening the eyes of your heart (something you choose to do),
you can meet with Me in a very real way that will impact your
heart and draw you closer and closer to Me.
So don’t hesitate to open your spiritual eyes, the eyes of your
imagination, for in so doing you are exercising your faith—
without which you cannot please Me. You draw near to Me by
faith just as you are saved by faith. Faith sees. Faith pictures.
Faith imagines. And when faith is exercised, spiritual reality,
My reality, bursts forth. As promised, My Spirit will take over
and you will enjoy sweet, precious fellowship with Me that will
bless and transform your life and bring Me great delight and
joy. I love you, Doug. Come to Me. I’ll bless the socks off of
you!
In conclusion, I asked:
Lord, how important is journaling in my life?
He responded:
Doug, I know it helps you in your weakness to grab hold of My

voice and to record it before it flitters away or you forget. It
helps you to capture the bubbling up of My Spirit’s thoughts
within you. You know, Doug, from your experience today that it
can bring great blessing to you because it facilitates relationship
and fellowship with Me. It’s been real, hasn’t it? You have
enjoyed meeting with Me today, haven’t you? You’ve been
blessed. Journaling facilitated that, and now you have a
precious permanent record of our time together. Isn’t that
encouragement enough to continue?

Key #4

Journaling, the writing out of your prayers and God’s answers, brings great
freedom in hearing God’s voice.

WRITE IT DOWN!
Record the vision and inscribe it on tablets (Habakkuk 2:2
NASB).

GOD TOLD HABAKKUK TO RECORD THE VISION (SEE HAB. 2:2). This was not an
isolated command. The Scriptures record many examples of individuals’ prayers
and God’s replies (e.g. the Psalms, many of the prophets, Revelation). In fact,
the Old Testament placed a high priority on the recorded testimony of God’s
words and works. They are memorials, clearly reminding us of what God said.
This is exactly why Hearing God has been presented to you in this interactive
format. The questions and prompts that fill these pages are not standard. In other
words, I do not expect you to copy them exactly and use them in your future
journaling exercises with God. You are welcome to, especially if the prompts
serve as a foundation that you can build upon. Again, what I have given you in
this book are simply ways to get you into the habit of asking questions while
listening to God and responding to what He speaks back to you. Most likely, the
questions that you ask will vary based on what God is saying to you.
Also, journaling helps accurately capture what God is saying to you in a
specific moment or season. Our minds are prone to forgetfulness, so when you
faithfully write down what God speaks to you, you are preserving the clarity and
accuracy of His voice. This is why keeping a written record is so important. Ff

Do you currently journal/keep consistent written record of what God is
saying to you?
If not, I encourage you—after you finish going through Hearing God,
purchase a journal and start to develop a lifestyle of recording your interactions
with God.
Convince yourself of the value of journaling. We engage as discipline what
we perceive as valuable. I want you to take this opportunity to write several
reasons why you believe it is so important to capture what God is saying to you
through keeping a written record.

Note: Think about how preserving a written record of what God speaks to you
has a powerful impact on your future, on generations to come (your children,
grandchildren), on people who are struggling with situations that God has given
you victory over, etc.

WRITE IN THE FLOW OF FAITH
He who comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a
rewarder of those who diligently seek Him (Hebrews 11:6).

THIS IS THE PROCESS OF “TWO-WAY JOURNALING,” AND I HAVE found it to be a
powerful catalyst for clearly discerning God’s inner, spontaneous flow. As you
journal, you are able to write in faith for long periods of time, seamlessly
capturing what you believe God is speaking to you. When you are finished
writing, measure it beside God’s written word; the key is making the evaluation
upon completion. So many of us never step into the divine flow of hearing God’s
voice because we are, moment by moment, trying to ascertain whether or not
God is actually speaking to us. We are constantly testing what we hear, with the
correct intention of trying to avoid deception.
However, testing involves doubt and doubt blocks divine communication, so I
do not recommend that you test while you are trying to receive from God (see
Heb. 11:6). With journaling, you can receive in faith, knowing that when the
flow has ended you can test and examine it carefully, making sure that it lines up
with Scripture (see 1 Thess. 5:21).
You might be wondering, Won’t this practice open me up to demonic spirits?
No, because this is not “automatic writing.” Before you ever begin the journaling
process, pray and completely yield your time of writing to the lordship of Jesus
Christ. If Jesus is truly Lord over your life, you are in a safe place.
Come before the Father right now and confess Jesus’s lordship over every
area of your life. Your mind. Your will. Your emotions. His lordship also
includes this time of journaling.

Now, take this time to start writing down what you believe the Holy Spirit is
saying to you. Write from the flow of faith in the lined space below. When
you are finished, review what you have written and measure it beside the
standard of Scripture.

BY JOURNALING
From Guru to God
This powerful testimony was sent to our ministry from Michael Graham.
He started with the following note:
Dear Mark,
In Toronto, 2006, you taught a group of us your journaling technique on
“how to hear God’s voice.” You stated that if we did this consistently for
three months it would change our lives. I complied. Indeed I have been
journaling in your manner almost daily ever since, and it has been a most
comforting, encouraging, and helpful element of my Christian walk. Thank
you! Sincerely in Him,
Michael Graham
Here is a sample journal entry from Michael. Note the honesty and
authenticity he demonstrates while writing before the Lord. This is why it is
so important that we write in that flow of faith, even if we are dealing with
difficult and unpleasant topics.
Lord, these days I seem to be making zero progress inside myself as to
peace, emotional buoyancy, or lack of flatness or depression! You speak of
blessings. I get none within, though yes, exterior to myself— encouraging
circumstances (thank You!) but none inside.
Change my nature! This is my petition. I experience not one single sign of
progress—if anything, it’s regression. A confession: Your promises seem
hollow. They seem always around the corner. My question and statements
are being made in earnest. So please respond, Lord.
Now review God’s answer to Michael:
Michael, you don’t understand the life I give and how My ways
work. Do not impatiently expect even measurable changes of
temperament and character within yourself. That sort of hope is
all “sight,” but all My purposes, words, and daily coaching are
purposed to build faith in you.

Only faith, actual faith in the face of all circumstances,
generates peace. This world and your reactions to it in the
absence of faith will always be disquieting. The “quiet” I offer
comes through faith in the face of all circumstances. If I was to
convert your interior person to one that was—through
personality, character or temperament—one unfazed by
anything, where would be the need for faith? Can you see now
My purpose in allowing your natural self to remain much as it
is for the cultivation of necessary faith, the ultimate disposition
for any one of My children to have? Think on this Michael.
Think, think deeply and regularly on this. You will surely start
to get it!

Section two

MEDITATE ON GOD’S VOICE
Meditate within your heart on your bed, and be still (Psalms 4:4).
My eyes anticipate the night watches, that I may meditate on Your word (Psalms
119:148 NASB).

MEDITATION
“God’s Spirit utilizing every faculty of my heart and mind, bringing forth
revelation which ushers in transformation.”

YOUR NEXT STEP IN HEARING GOD
ONCE WE LEARN HOW GOD SPEAKS, WE NEED TO DISCOVER what He is saying and
revealing to us. Biblical meditation is the key that enables you and I to unlock
the mysteries of Heaven in our lives.
Is meditation simply me studying harder?
Is meditation a New Age or eastern technique?
The answer to both questions is no!
Meditation is intently seeking God’s revelation, resulting in God disclosing
Himself to you.
It is the glory of God to conceal a matter. It is the glory of kings to search out
a matter (see Prov. 25:2). So we are encouraged to pray for the eyes of our hearts
to be enlightened, so we might know (see Eph. 1:17-18). God wants you to hear
His voice, yes. But He also wants you to understand and start applying what He
is saying to you. Understanding comes through biblical meditation.
HOW TO APPROACH THE MEDITATION PROCESS

This section is broken up into the following segments:
1. Four Pillars of Biblical Meditation: Here you will receive a
foundation on why meditation is such a necessary part of the Christian
life and how it enables us to hear God in greater dimensions. In this
section, you will discover what meditation is and why it is beneficial to
you.
2. Seven-Step Meditation Process: In this segment, you will learn how
to practice biblical meditation in seven steps. By the end, you will
have an example of what it looks like to go through the process and be
able to comfortably model it in your own life.

ENGAGE
This section will be different from the 4 Keys to Hearing God’s Voice as it
will not be as directed in the interactive journaling segment.
Why? Now that you have a greater understanding of writing from a flow of

faith and journaling, I want you to simply write down what the Holy Spirit
speaks to you about each of the Meditation Principles you learn.
In fact, use this opportunity to start practicing and experimenting with these
principles. Don’t write about how you plan to incorporate them into your daily
spiritual disciplines; step out and start to journal about how you are meditating
on a specific passage of Scripture.
• Write out what Scripture you are talking to God about.
• Reflect on what God is saying back by writing it down.
• Ask the Lord how He wants you to apply a certain Scripture to your
everyday life.

Part One

FOUR PILLARS OF BIBLICAL MEDITATION

Pillar #1

MEDITATION IS A CONTINUOUS ACTIVITY
This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you
shall meditate in it day and night (Joshua 1:8).

WE MEDITATE EVERYWHERE—IN BED, IN THE FIELD, IN THE temple, and while
working. We meditate all the time—day, evening, and nighttime. Meditation is
our lifestyle (see Phil. 4:8). We meditate on God and the things that are of Him
— His splendor, His Majesty, His beauty, His Bible, His precepts, His statutes
and His ways, His works (i.e. His creation, the world), and His activities (the
things He does).
We don’t meditate on evil, wickedness, or the works of satan.

Describe what meditation as a continuous activity looks like to you.

Pillar #2
MEDITATION INVOLVES GOD’S SPIRIT
UTILIZING EVERY FACULTY OF ONE’S HEART
AND MIND
You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all
your soul, and with all your mind (Matthew 22:37).

MEDITATION IS GOD’S SPIRIT IN OUR HEARTS GUIDING EVERY faculty in both
hemispheres of our brain. We center down, using quieting music or pulsing,
forceful music and/or seeing ourselves present with Him (see Acts 2:25), and we
sing, pray, seek, and inquire (including taking our complaints to God to receive
His counsel).
We speak, talk, mutter, communicate, babble (probably speaking in tongues),
roar (at the enemy and when revelation hits), mourn (repent of our sins), muse,
consider, ponder, imagine, study (study is good when wrapped with these other
aspects of meditation). We sense the indwelling Holy Spirit crying out for
intimacy with the Father (see Gal. 4:6).

Based on this description, consider some of the different expressions of
biblical meditation. Have you experienced any of these in your prayer time
with God (speak, mutter, speaking in tongues, mourn, roar, muse, etc.)?

Pillar #3

MEDITATION RESULTS IN REVELATION
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may
give to you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge
of Him (Ephesians 1:17).

WE QUIET OURSELVES DOWN IN WORSHIP AND PRAYER, ASKING for revelation while
fixing our eyes on the Lord who reveals truth to our hearts (see Eph. 1:17-18).
We tune to flowing thoughts, visions, emotions, and power from the Holy Spirit
within us (see John 7:37-39). We experience our hearts burning with revelations
as He opens up the Scriptures to us (see Luke 24:15-32). His spoken word is
powerful (see Isa. 55:11; John 6:63).
Ask the Holy Spirit to give you a clear view of what revelation is. How
would you define revelation, based on what you just read? (A good place to
start would be reading Ephesians 1.)

Pillar #4
REVELATION BRINGS TRANSFORMATION!
But we all, with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror the glory
of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from
glory to glory, just as by the Spirit of the Lord (2 Corinthians
3:18).

BURNING REVELATION CREATES LIVING TRUTH IN OUR HEARTS. We say, “Yes, Lord,”
to these revelations, coming into agreement with what we see Jesus doing and
speaking. This results in us being transformed while we look at Jesus in action
(see 2 Cor. 3:18; 4:17-18).
How do you think revelation takes the Bible and makes it Living Truth in
your life?

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Transformed by Revelation: A Reflection on Meditation
One example of revelation bringing transformation was the Lord
speaking in my journaling. He said:

Mark, whatever you fix your eyes on grows within you, and whatever
grows within you, you become.
Wow! I had been fixing my eyes on my sin, so sin grew within me. Then
I fixed my eyes on my efforts to overcome sin through the strength of my
flesh, and pride grew within me (or discouragement). Then I fixed my eyes
on biblical law and legalism grew within me. Or I fixed my eyes on the
anti-Christ and fear grew within me.
Now I fix my eyes on Jesus, and Jesus grows within me! I have
experienced lifelong transformation by just this one revelatory word spoken
into my heart by the Lord.
These transforming moments can occur continuously if we meditate
daily. So we will meditate daily so that we become the radiant expression of
Jesus and we make our way prosperous (see 2 Cor. 3:18; 4:18; Heb. 12:2;
Josh. 1:8).

Part Two

SEVEN-STEP MEDITATION PROCESS
IN THIS SECTION, I AM GOING TO TAKE YOU STEP BY STEP through the Seven-step
Meditation Process. This part will be especially interactive, so I encourage you
to follow the instructions in order to get the most about of this exercise.
It would be recommended for you to engage one step each day, so you can
familiarize yourself with the entire process, little by little. Below, I am giving
you a list of all seven steps to the meditation process. This is what we will be
studying in the pages ahead.
Breakdown of the Seven-step Meditation Process:
1. Write
2. Quiet Down
3. Reason
4. Speak and Imagine
5. Feel God’s Heart
6. Hear God’s Rhema
7. Act
Here is how this section will be broken down:
• Bible Verse: I recommend that you choose a Scripture verse that
you would like to meditate on this week; however, if you would prefer,
I will take you through the process using one that I meditated on,

Genesis 24:63. This will give you a guided tour of the process.
• Step: You will review each step to the meditation process.
• Dr. Virkler Reflection: I will share my reflections on Genesis
24:63, giving you a sample of how I have interacted with the
meditation process.
• Journal: This is where you make it all your own. Write down and
record what you say to/hear from the Lord.

HOW TO MEDITATE ON A TOPIC
1. Be led by God to the topic: God will show you the topic He wants
you to explore by bringing it to your consciousness through thoughts,
the comment of a friend or a book, or a presenting need in your life
which demands the revelation and power of God to overcome (see
John 16:13).
2. Be cleansed by His blood: Approach your meditation time by
drawing near to the Lord, repenting of all sins, and asking for and
receiving the cleansing of His blood (see Heb. 10:22).
3. Be humble and teachable: Ask for the Holy Spirit to reveal truth
to you (see Eph. 1:17-18). Be willing to discover and embrace His
truth, no matter what it costs (reputation, pride, ego, job, financial
security, etc.).
4. Be fearless: Some churches will excommunicate, fire, or shun a
person who disagrees with the church’s belief. Thus fear hinders many
from pursuing truth. Put your whole trust in God to sustain you, even
if you are shunned or rejected by organized religion.
5. Be wholehearted in your search: Seek the Lord with your whole
heart (i.e. presenting all your faculties to the Lord to fill and to use)
and you will find Him (see Jer. 29:13). Ask the Holy Spirit to guide
and fill your heart and then tune to flowing thoughts, flowing pictures,
flowing emotions.
6. Let the Holy Spirit guide you in the use of the following Bible
tools:
• A good concordance such as Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance
and the King James Concordance (gives you every verse where a
specific Hebrew or Greek word is used).
• Some good Bible dictionaries such as Strong’s Hebrew and
Greek Dictionaries, Brown-Driver• Briggs Dictionary, Vines Complete Bible Dictionary of New
Testament Words, Vines Complete Dictionary of Old Testament

Words.
• Miscellaneous analytical tools such as Nave’s Topical Bible and
Manners and Customs of the Bible, etc.
• Interpretive tools such as exegetical commentaries, expository
commentaries, and devotional commentaries.
7. Receive counsel: Wisdom and safety come from receiving counsel,
input, and confirmation from the five-fold team God has given to you
(see Prov. 11:14; Eph. 4:11; 2 Cor. 13:1).

Step One

WRITE
Record the vision and inscribe it on tablets (Habakkuk 2:2
NASB).

COPY THE VERSE BY HAND ONTO A PIECE OF PAPER OR THREE by five card and keep it
with you to meditate on, memorize, and mutter throughout the day. Also, record
the verse in the lined space below (see Deut. 17:18).
By the time you are finished with this guided exercise, going through the
seven-step process, the goal is for you to have your own meditation journal.
There, you can record Scriptures and the revelation you receive while meditating
on those passages.
Choose a Bible verse that you would like to meditate on.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
If you do not have one, you can start with Genesis 24:63 and I will help guide
you through the meditation process.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field in the evening; and he lifted his eyes
and looked, and there, the camels were coming.

JOURNAL
Write down the Scripture verse you choose for the meditation exercise.

Step Two

QUIET DOWN
Surely I have composed and quieted my soul (Psalms 131:2
NASB).

BECOME STILL IN GOD’S PRESENCE, LOVING HIM THROUGH soft soaking/quiet
worship music (see 2 Kings 3:15-16) and/or praying in tongues (see 1 Cor.
14:14). Imagine that Jesus is with you during this process. The Holy Spirit is
inside you, desiring to take truth and turn it into revelation. Tune in to His
flowing thoughts, pictures, and emotions (see John 7:37-39).
Do not journal until after you have engaged this process. Then you can reflect
on the journey through writing. Right now, the key is learning how to quiet
yourself down in God’s presence and position yourself to meditate on what He is
saying to you.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
With this verse, I used the Sea of Galilee Quieting Exercise, picturing myself
together with Jesus and tuned to flow. This exercise is available for free at
www.cwgministries.org/galilee.

JOURNAL
How did the process of quieting down go for you today? Describe your
journey below.

Step Three

REASON
“Come now, and let us reason together,” says the Lord (Isaiah
1:18).

NOW, YOU WILL REASON TOGETHER WITH GOD ABOUT THE Scripture. This means
that the Holy Spirit will guide your reasoning process (i.e. through flow).
Ask questions like: “Lord, what do You want to show me about any of the
following?”
• the context of a verse
• the Hebrew/Greek definitions of the key words in the verse
• any cultural understandings

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
Based on the Scripture example, Genesis 24:63, here is a glimpse into my
time of reasoning with the Lord. This is what He spoke to my heart during the
process:
Meditation is a lifestyle that I have ordained. Do it in the evening. It is better
than watching television. As you do it, I can and will bring the choicest
provisions of life to you. In this case, Isaac lifted up his eyes and saw the gift of
his future wife who was being brought to him by his servant. His servant had
discovered her in a distant land through a divine appointment. I also bring good
gifts to you from distant places while you honor Me by making meditation your
lifestyle. For when you honor Me by inviting Me into your everyday life, I honor
you by bringing to you divine appointments. Honor Me with your lifestyle. Let
your lifestyle be one of ongoing meditation.

JOURNAL
Write out what the Lord shares with you as you reason through your
Scripture verse together with Him.
Be sure to ask Him the questions that are presented above.

Step Four

SPEAK AND IMAGINE
PONDER THE SCRIPTURE, SPEAKING IT TO YOURSELF SOFTLY over and over again
until you can say it with your eyes closed.
As you repeat the Scripture, allow yourself to see it with the eyes of your
heart. Note what the picture is in your mind’s eye as you repeat the Scripture.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
Based on the Scripture example, Genesis 24:63, this is what I see:
I see Isaac walking in a field in the evening and pondering as he walks along. I
see Jesus at his side, speaking with him.

JOURNAL
Write down the pictures that come to your mind as you repeat the Scripture
verse to yourself and start to see it with the eyes of your heart.

Step Five
FEEL GOD’S HEART
WHILE IMAGINING THE SCRIPTURE (AS OUTLINED IN STEP four), ask: “Lord, what
does this Scripture reveal about Your heart toward me?” Feel His heart and
journal it out.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
Based on the Scripture example, Genesis 24:63, this is what I feel is God’s
heart toward me:
Mark, I love to walk with you in the cool of the day. This was My original
design. This allows you to hear My thoughts and receive My wisdom, My
counsel, and My blessing. It is My desire to love you and care for you and
provide for you and this is one key way I can do that if you allow Me to. Come
experience My heart toward you in the cool of the day. Come meditate in the
cool of the day.

JOURNAL
Write down what you feel God’s heart toward you is through your verse.

Step Six
HEAR GOD’S RHEMA
For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any
two-edged sword (Hebrews 4:12 NASB).

PUT YOURSELF IN THE PICTURE OF THIS SCRIPTURE IN YOUR mind.
Ask, “Lord, what are You speaking to me through this Scripture?” Tune to the
flowing thoughts and flowing pictures (God’s voice and vision) and record this
dialogue in your two-way journaling.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
Based on the Scripture example, Genesis 24:63, this is what I believe that God
is actively speaking to me:
Mark, there is so much I want to reveal to you, and I do it as we take these
walks together in the cool of the day. You see, this was My pattern in the
Garden of Eden. I chose for it to be our pattern also, that we walk together
down the road of life. Will you come to Me in the cool of the day and meditate
in My presence, allowing Me to minister grace to you on a daily basis? You
can ponder the specific needs and situations you are surrounded by and
present them to Me, and I will give you revelation and insight as to how to best
handle them and respond to them. I will do this daily if you will walk with Me
daily. You will experience ideas and understanding beyond your natural
ability. You will accomplish beyond your natural giftings.

JOURNAL
Write down and record what the Lord is actively speaking to you about
your Scripture verse.

Step Seven

ACT
Blessed are those who hear the word of God and observe it (Luke
11:28 NASB).

ACCEPT THE REVELATION GOD IS SPEAKING TO YOU AND repent of any sin that is
opposite of it. Repentance is two-fold. While it involves experiencing godly
sorrow over our sin, it also transforms the way we think. The Holy Spirit is
inviting you to adjust the way you think—and ultimately the way you live—to
come into alignment with His revelation.
Speak it forth and then act on it! Meditation is all about producing a lifestyle
where we start living out the Word of God.

REFLECTION FROM DR. VIRKLER
Here is an example of what I have prayed back to the Lord in response to His
revelation:
Lord, I accept this awesome invitation from You, my Lord and my Redeemer.
What a gracious gift You have offered me, and all I have to do is say yes and we
walk together. I receive Your life and fullness into my heart and life. Lord, what
an amazing offer You are making. I roar at every false belief that I can do it on
my own. That is a lie from satan; I renounce humanism and rationalism. Get out
of my life, now! I choose to die daily and come alive only to Jesus, who is my
life.
Lord, I will walk with You and talk with You in the cool of the day, and I will
present to You the issues I am facing and ask for Your wisdom and insight on
them. I thank You, Lord, for Your gracious wisdom, revelation, and strength
which flow so freely!

JOURNAL
Write down your response to God’s revelation in the form of an action
prayer.
Ask the Lord how He wants you to integrate this meditation into your
everyday life and then purpose in your spirit to do it.

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Releasing God’s Healing Power through the Seven-step Healing
Model
One practical way that we can act on hearing God’s voice is through the
ministry of healing. This is not reserved for a special type of Christian; all
believers have received the power of the Holy Spirit and have been
commissioned to heal the sick.
Also, all believers are able to flow in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. As you
develop a lifestyle of hearing God’s voice, expect Him to speak to you—
clearly and specifically—about people He wants to touch with His healing
power.
When you come in contact with these individuals, here is a simple sevenstep model for you to follow as you pray for their healing and watch God
perform the miraculous in their lives.
1. Express Compassion. Smile, ask their name, express love to them,
“Of course Jesus wants to heal you…Jesus includes everyone…you
absolutely are included.”
2. Ask. “What’s Wrong?” “Where does it hurt?” and then, “May I pray
for you?” Focus intently on one item at a time.

3. Become Still and Listen to God. Ask, “How should I pray for this
person?” Relax, smile, and receive, tuning to flowing thoughts and
flowing pictures as your eyes are fixed on Jesus. If no special
revelation bubbles up, then minister healing based on the promises in
the Bible and Jesus’s example of healing all. Maybe ask the person,
“How long have you had this and what event occurred at the time this
problem began?” To receive words of knowledge, you should ask for
them, receiving any “miscellaneous” information the Lord may want to
reveal through the above means while also tuning to spontaneous
emotions, spontaneous bodily sensations, and spontaneous
pictures/words of body parts. Step out in faith and lovingly share them.
4. Invite God’s Presence, His Compassion, and Power to Heal. “Lord,
pour Your love and healing power on this person. Holy Spirit, we
welcome Your presence.” With your eyes open, watch the person for
signs of the Holy Spirit moving upon them (eyelids flutter, become
flushed, gentle trembling, peace). Now, the love and power of the Lord
is present to heal! (See Luke 5:17.)
5. Command the Healing in Jesus’s Name. Lay your hand on the
infirm spot (be sensitive when praying for opposite sex). Command
the affliction/ pain to leave. Use short prayers (ten to twenty seconds).
Both client and prayer counselor are to stay relaxed and smiling so you
do not block the flow of the Holy Spirit. Maintain this attitude:
“Healing is easy because Jesus has already done the work.” (See Isaiah
53:4-5; Psalms 103:3; 147:3.) “Because Jesus is alive, tonight the
blind will see, the lame will walk, the deaf will hear.” Rebuke demons
and command pain to go. Speak restoration and normal function of all
cells and body parts. “Function normally in Jesus’s name!” See God’s
light penetrating the area. You focus God’s healing light on the infirm
spot just as you would focus a magnifying glass on a piece of paper so
that the sun’s rays are intensified and start it on fire. God’s focused
healing power releases miracles (see Luke 11:34-36; Hab. 3:4). You
are simply declaring, believing and seeing His divine energy penetrate
the area.
6. Test It Out. Invite them to thank God for the healing as they do
something they could not easily do before. Miracles manifest as they
step out in faith, believing, thanking, and receiving in childlike joy
(see Mark 11:22-24). As the lepers went, they were healed (see Luke

17:14). “Get up and walk.”
7. Repeat. Pray a second, third, and fourth time. If you pray and you
see no visible change or you see a partial healing, then pray again
(immediately) until you have prayed three to four times and either they
are completely healed or you note no further improvement (see Matt.
7:7-8; Luke 18:1-8; Mark 8:23-25). These prayers do not need to be
any longer than your initial prayer. Close by praying a blessing.
Finally, be sure to determine if they have ever invited Christ into their
lives. If not, lead them in a simple salvation prayer.

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Success with the Seven-step Meditation Process
I used this technique and it was one of the most intimate times I have had
with the Lord in quite a while. Bottom line: I found this seven-step process
very effective and I plan to use it more in the future. Below is a sample
journal entry as I used this method.
—PASTOR JIM FRENCH
“Do not let your heart be troubled; believe in God, believe also in Me”
(John 14:1 NASB).
As I meditated on this verse, the Lord showed me a vision of a heart—my
heart which was pierced with arrows. I asked Him what the arrows were
and what He wanted to tell me.

MY JOURNAL ENTRY
This is what I believe the Lord spoke to me:
Son, our hearts are fused—they are one. But there are some aspects of
your heart that you have not completely yielded to me. I await your
decision to do so.
The arrows you saw were wounds in your heart from people and events—
past hurts and pains. The choice is yours to hold on to them or release
them. But if you choose to deal with the wounds yourself, the arrows will

remain. Only I can truly remove the arrows and heal the wounds, but you
must yield these to me.
Jim, the ministry places you in a position of vulnerability. I ask you to
pour your life into people who may not accept you as My servant and
messenger. They too have their own pain which will not allow them to
trust. In ministering, you must not allow rejection to penetrate your heart.
Remember, you were not sent to heal—I was. Your job is to present Me in
every situation, and any acceptance or rejection is acceptance or rejection
of Me. You must make a conscious decision to not accept any rejection or
you will be wounded again. The wounds in your heart make it more
difficult for Me to minister through you. Yield these wounds and the
people who inflicted them to Me, and I will heal you.
Here is my response:
Yes, Lord. I release these wounds and the people who inflicted them to You.
Forgive me for hanging on to them. I repent and ask for Your grace to not
allow hurt to penetrate my heart again. Thank You, Lord!

MEDITATION JOURNAL
ONCE YOU HAVE FINISHED GOING THROUGH THIS SECTION, I would encourage you to
purchase a separate journal for biblical meditation. Here, you will be able to
write down different Scriptures and take them through the entire process.
For now, I would like to provide you with several pages where you can begin
engaging this process in your everyday life.
Step 1: Write

Step 2: Quiet Down

Step 3: Reason

Step 4: Speak and Imagine

Step 5: Feel God’s Heart

Step 6: Hear God’s Rhema

Step 7: Act

Section Three

HEARING GOD THROUGH YOUR DREAMS
I will bless the Lord who has counseled me; indeed, my mind instructs me in the
night (Psalms 16:7 NASB).
Your young men shall see visions, your old men shall dream dreams (Acts 2:17).

WHY ARE DREAMS IMPORTANT TO US
TODAY?
GOD HAS CHOSEN TO SPEAK WITH HUMANKIND THROUGH dreams. He guides and
counsels us through our dreams. He establishes covenants with us through our
dreams. He grants us gifts in our dreams. Scripture shows us that God has
utilized dreams from Genesis to Revelation, and it also reveals that He would
continue to use them in the last days. As you get ready to conclude this
introductory journey into hearing God, I invite you to reconsider the amount of
importance you place on your dream life.
Remember, God is always speaking. He is constantly communicating with His
people. We must position ourselves in a place where we are able to clearly and
consistently hear His voice. This is why we began by reviewing the 4 Keys to
Hearing God’s Voice. These are absolutely foundational if we want to live a life
of confidently hearing from Heaven.
We took it to the next level by studying biblical meditation, particularly the
Seven-step Process to Biblical Meditation. Once we hear from God, we are
given a responsibility for what He said to us. Whether we hear from the voice of
the Holy Spirit speaking directly to us or hear Him speaking to us through the
pages of Scripture, our responsibility is the same—action. We must be good
stewards of God’s voice.
Meditation is a powerful tool that helps us internalize what God is saying so
that we can become well-equipped to live it out in our everyday lives.
Meditation is truly a catalyst to lifestyle transformation. Some hear God’s voice
but never do anything with what He says. However, by pursuing a lifestyle of
biblical meditation, we are saying back to God, “I want to be one who hears
from You, and I want to be transformed by what I hear.” The person who lives
this way positions him/herself to consistently hear God’s voice. God is looking
for good and faithful stewards who put His Word to work in their lives.

BECOME A STEWARD OF GOD’S DREAM MESSAGES
God is calling His people to reexamine the night hours. Consider that when
you total up all dreams and visions in the Bible and all the stories and actions
which come out of these dreams and visions, you have about one-third of the
Bible. This is equal to the size of the New Testament! This reveals that dreams

are a central way God has chosen to communicate with us, and thus they must be
given great weight. We must learn how to steward what God speaks to us in the
night. In the final pages of our journey together, I want to help you begin this
process in your life.
The Bible declares that God counsels us at night through our dreams (see Ps.
16:7), and it is full of examples and illustrations of this principle. In the dreams
recorded throughout Scripture, God gives wise direction concerning the next
steps for people to take. He grants wisdom and encourages people in faith. He
shows them how to escape coming calamity and how to provide for their
families in the midst of imminent disasters. God even enters into covenants with
people and grants them gifts in their dreams! These examples reinforce the truth
that our dream lives are significant.
As you interact with the pages ahead, you will start learning how to explore
your own dreams. The most important application to take away from this section
is simply your dreams are important and should be recorded. This is the
discipline I would like to help you start including in your life.
In the same way you are learning to journal and meditate, I want you to
routinely record the dreams that you dream. Start bringing them before the Lord
and ask Him for wisdom, clarity, and interpretation.
All of us can learn to hear from God during the two hours of dream life that
we have each night. This final section is designed to give you some basic tools
on how to identify and start learning to interpret the dreams God gives you.
In addition, the corresponding journal pages will help you develop a regular
habit of recording what God is saying to you through your dreams.

SEVEN REASONS WE SHOULD LISTEN TO OUR
DREAMS
BEFORE YOU START WRITING DOWN AND RECORDING YOUR dreams, it is important
that you understand why dreams are so important to begin with.
Reflect on the following seven reasons why you should listen to your dreams.
1. God declared that He would speak through dreams and visions in
the Old Testament.
Then He said, “Hear now My words: If there is a prophet among
you, I, the Lord, make Myself known to him in a vision; I speak to
him in a dream” (Numbers 12:6).
2. God declared that He did speak through dreams and visions in the
Old Testament.
I have also spoken by the prophets, and have multiplied visions; I
have given symbols through the witness of the prophets (Hosea
12:10).
3. God declares that He will communicate through dreams and visions
in the New Testament.
“And it shall be in the last days,” God says, “that I will pour
forth of My Spirit on all mankind; and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions,
and your old men shall dream dreams” (Acts 2:17 NASB).
4. God declares that He will counsel us at night through our dreams.
I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel; my heart also
instructs me in the night seasons (Psalms 16:7).
5. Rather than our dreams being fatalistic, dreams are calling us to
change so we will not perish.
Indeed God speaks once, or twice, yet no one notices it. In a
dream, a vision of the night, when sound sleep falls on men, while
they slumber in their beds, then He opens the ears of men, and
seals their instruction, that He may turn man aside from his

conduct, and keep man from pride; He keeps back his soul from
the pit, and his life from passing over into Sheol (Job 33:14-18
NASB).
6. God does very significant things within dreams. For example, He
established the Abrahamic Covenant in a dream.
Now when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon
Abram; and behold, terror and great darkness fell upon him. God
said to Abram, “Know for certain that your descendants will be
strangers in a land that is not theirs, where they will be enslaved
and oppressed four hundred years.” …On that day the Lord made
a covenant with Abram, saying, “To your descendants I have
given this land, from the river of Egypt as far as the great river,
the river Euphrates” (Genesis 15:12-13,18 NASB).
7. God grants supernatural gifts through dreams.
In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream at night; and
God said, “Ask what you wish Me to give you.”
“…So give Your servant an understanding heart to judge Your
people to discern between good and evil. For who is able to judge
this great people of Yours?”
“…Behold, I have done according to your words. Behold, I have
given you a wise and discerning heart, so that there has been no
one like you before you, nor shall one like you arise after you.”
…Then Solomon awoke, and behold, it was a dream. And he came
to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord,
and offered burnt offerings and made peace offerings, and made
a feast for all his servants (1 Kings 3:5,9,12,15 NASB).

DREAM DEDICATION
TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO WRITE A PERSONAL PRAYER OF dedication to the Lord as
you begin to explore this subject.
• Ask Him to lead and direct you.
• Invite the Holy Spirit to bring clarity.
• Above all, pray that your ability to hear God’s voice through your
dreams would increase.
Now, start dedicating your times of rest to the Lord. Before you go to sleep
tonight, ask Him to speak to you through your dreams.
Also, ask the Holy Spirit to help you clearly remember your dreams so you
can write them down.

YOUR SEVEN-DAY DREAM JOURNAL
FOR THE NEXT SEVEN DAYS, WRITE DOWN YOUR DREAMS ON the following pages.
Record them in as much detail as you can. Do not try to interpret them. If you
sense the Lord is giving you clarity on a particular dream or something uniquely
stands out to you, write it down elsewhere and refer to it once you receive more
instruction in dream interpretation.
For now, simply write down what you remember dreaming and keep this
information in this journal. You will have seven days’ worth of lined space
available. If you cannot remember your dream, simply write, “Did not
remember.”
After you finish writing out your dreams, I have included a few testimonies of
how God has spoken to individuals through their dreams. Read their firsthand
accounts and discover the life-changing impact that your dreams have.
Before you start, here are five practical things you can do to help recall your
dreams:
1. Say to yourself, “I believe dreams contain a valid message.”
This is a signal to your heart that you are taking the process
seriously and want to hear what God wants to speak to you
through your dreams. You are giving your heart permission, and
even asking it to awaken you after each dream. Your heart will do
exactly that. If you do not awaken within five minutes of the
dream ending, you will not recall it. If, however, you tell your
heart that dreams are nothing more than leftover undigested pizza,
then your heart lets you sleep through the dream and does not
awaken you after it is over. As a result, you do not recall it.
2. Ask God to speak to you through dreams as you fall asleep.
God does answer prayers, especially when they are prayed in
accordance with His will!
3. Put this journal beside your bed and immediately record your
dreams upon awakening.
You will forget most of your dreams by the morning, so be sure
to get up and write them down when you awaken.

4. Get eight hours of sleep, as the entire last hour will be dream-time.
5. Awaken naturally, without the use of an alarm clock. Alarms
actually shatter dream recall and blast tidbits of dreams into oblivion
where they are never found.

Day One

MY DREAM

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
A Wake-up Shaking
I love hearing testimonies of God speaking to His children through their
dreams and night visions. And Elizabeth Kiessling’s story is one awesome
example! I’ll let her share the powerful experience in her own words.
I had a very encouraging dream about my son, one that really set me free.
My son was 19 and was not really pursuing the Lord ardently. He received
Jesus young and even spoke in tongues but seemed to cool off in his teens
and as he went to college.
We had numerous bad trials that really rocked us, and perhaps him as well.
I don’t know. Our hearts have been toward him and we continued to pray
for Jesus to encounter him, touch his heart, and wake him up again. He had
friends who were not following the Lord, drinking and smoking weed,
partying every weekend.
So, here is the exciting part.
One night I had a dream. I saw a long dining table, my daughter was sitting
there talking to another young lady, and my son was at the other end with
his head down on his arms asleep.
All of a sudden Jesus came in. I saw Him; He was dressed in a long
beautiful blue tunic with pants underneath. Gold embroidery surrounded the
sleeves and the front up around his neck. He had a very large beautiful
crown on His head. He walked up to my son, bent over, and began to gently
shake his arm as if to wake him up!

Hallelujah! Yahoo! Praise the Lamb! I just thank Him every day for
encouraging me where my son is concerned and know that Jesus has this
taken care of. I don’t worry anymore—yay God!
May this encourage all parents with wayward children.
Elizabeth Kiessling

Day Two

MY DREAM

Day Three

MY DREAM

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Counsel to Not Purchase a House
The following story from Don Swartzlander shows how God will give us
very practical instruction through our dreams.
God called our family of six to leave our home, relatives, and job in
Pennsylvania and go to Bible college in New York State. He gave us that
“word” in late July. We were thinking that “someday” we would go, but we
were told by our pastor that we could be in school that September. So we
left our five-, four-, three-, and one-year-olds with relatives for a three-day
weekend and went to Lima, New York to look for a job and housing.
We spent every daylight hour looking for places to live and work. It was
frustrating searching with no success and time was running out. Most places
were either too small, too expensive, or too far from the school.
My wife and I looked at one house that was about ten miles away, and it
seemed like it would meet our needs. However, we would have to make the
decision whether to buy it or not in the next 24 hours. We thought that it
was the only one that would fit, so maybe it was an example of how “God
was supplying.” Sue and I prayed and went to bed in the guest wing of the
school.
In my sleep, I had a dream. In the dream I was in jail. I was holding onto
and looking out through heavy steel bars. But the funny thing about the jail
was that I knew the door was closed, but not locked. I could get myself out.
All I had to do was open the door and walk out. But I was still inside
looking out.

In the morning I told my wife about the dream. I asked her what she
thought, and she suggested we ask God about it. We did, and He told me
that it was up to me/us if we bought the house or not. But if we did buy it,
we would be “locked up” by that purchase and really not be free to do what
He wanted us to. It was our/my decision to be bound or be free.
We decided to “be free” and not to buy the house. That meant we were free,
but we had less than twelve hours left to find a place to live. We went into
the lounge and sat on a couch wondering what to do next. Being summer,
there were not many people on campus. One of the maintenance workers (a
graduated student) came down the hall. He introduced himself and asked us
what we were doing there. We told him. He said that he rarely went that
way but God had directed him there for some unknown reason. Now he
knew why. He went on to say that he and his family had graduated and
were moving on into ministry. The four bedroom house they lived in might
be available when they moved that week.
We tried to contact the landlord, but his wife said he was golfing. We had
to leave for home so we got directions to the golf course. Once there I
hopped in a golf cart and hunted for her husband. I found him and he was
puzzled why someone would be searching for him. He asked, “What do you
want?” I told him we would like to rent his house. He reached out and
shook my hand. He said my handshake was good enough for him and he
rented us the house right there on the golf course.
We lived in that house for the next four years. Praise God for the protection,
freedom, and guidance He provided in a dream.

Day Four

MY DREAM

Day Five

MY DREAM

IN EVERYDAY LIFE
The King’s Dancers Christian School of Performing Arts and
Worship: Birthed out of Hearing
God’s Voice and Dreaming His Dreams
Suzanne Cerniglia shares her incredible story about how God used a
dream to birth a school that is leading multitudes into new artistic
expressions of worship and creativity.
My name is Suzanne Cerniglia and I am the founder and co-owner of the
King’s Dancers Christian School of Performing Arts located in
Schenectady, New York. I would like to tell you a little about my testimony
of how the school came about.
In 2002, I had recently gotten married to my husband Salvatore Cerniglia at
a young age of 19 years. I had completed a two-year degree in early
childhood education in a community college just before getting married. I
really felt in my heart that there was something special for me to do as a
career, so I began to pray for God’s perfect will for my life.
Around this time my husband, Salvatore, introduced me to Mark Virkler’s
courses at Christian Leadership University—specifically “Communion with
God” and “Wisdom through Dream Interpretation.” It was while I was
taking these classes that God revealed to me His special calling for my life.
While I was taking the classes I decided to enroll in nursing school. I felt
like I would be a good pediatric nurse, so I completed the first year and was
starting my second year when just then I had my first dream in the night
regarding my calling.

Dream One: In my dream I was on a hospital floor and all my other
classmates where in their nursing uniforms. However, I was the only one
not in my uniform, but was actually in a classical ballet leotard and tutu. I
felt so out of place in my dream. I did not think much about that dream, but
I did write it down in my dream journal.
I continued with my nursing school at that point and about one month later
received another significant dream.
Dream Two: Down from Heaven was sent a very colorful dancing
streamer. I jumped up and grabbed it and started climbing up the streamer
into Heaven. There I found that I was standing in front of the Living God!
He spoke to me in a low and beautiful voice. He said, “Now you are ready.”
Just then He proceeded to pour what looked like gold paint from the top of
my head all the way down my body until I was covered with gold paint.
Then I awoke. I immediately wrote down all I could remember in that
dream in my dream journal. It was so powerful, but I still did not know
what I was ready for.
Then came Dream Three. It was very clear and outright for me to know
what God wanted in my life. The Lord said in my ear in an audible voice,
“Go look in your journal.” At this same time I was keeping a journal as part
of the “Communion with God” course which teaches you how to hear
God’s voice. I began to walk to my journal in the dream and opened it up.
The words were large and black and they said “Christian Dance Studio
2002.”
God could not have spoken any clearer to me than in this dream. I do feel
that through understanding dream interpretation and especially writing
down these significant dreams, God revealed the plan He had for my life. I
feel fulfilled, and I know without a doubt that God has made me to bring
Him glory by teaching others to dance for His glory.
The King’s Dancers has grown considerably since starting with four
students in the basement of my sister-in-law’s house. The King’s Dancers
now has over 165 students ages 4 to adult, a staff of 9 teachers, and are in 4
locations within a 60-mile radius. We offer a variety of types of dance and
worship including ballet, tap, Irish step, hip-hop, flag and banner technique,
and incorporating into prophetic drama.
What is amazing is that we do very little marketing for the dance school. It
is so clear that God is behind what we are doing, because He just sends the

students and teachers effortlessly. Praise be to our God! Since 2002 the
King’s Dancers have been able to perform at Christian events, secular high
schools, special church services, and other events in our local community.
We have been featured by our local newspaper, the Albany Times Union,
which did an extensive article and video on the King’s Dancers. We did not
seek them out—the Albany Times Union sought us out for unknown
reasons. They were so intrigued with and interested in our Christian dance
school.
What is truly amazing and scriptural is how one or two dreams and one or
two journals can change your whole life’s direction and destiny. I love God
more than ever and love my vocation and ministry. There is no other way
all this could have happened if it was not for Him! If you connect to Him,
you will connect with your destiny!

Day Six

MY DREAM

Day Seven

MY DREAM

SEVEN FOUNDATIONAL PRINCIPLES FOR
DREAM INTERPRETATION
1. Most dreams are symbolic (including biblical dreams), so view
them the same way you would view a political cartoon.
Throw the switch in your brain that says, “Look at this
symbolically.” You can learn the art of communicating
symbolically by playing the game Pictionary or Bible Pictionary.
2. The symbols will come from the dreamer’s life, so ask, “What does
this symbol mean to me?” or, if you working on another’s dream, ask,
“What does this symbol mean to you?”
For example, Joseph was a shepherd, and he dreamed of sheaves
and the sun, moon, and stars bowing down (see Gen. 37:1-11).
These images surround a shepherd boy who lives in the fields.
Nebuchadnezzar, a king, dreamed of statues of gold (see Dan
2:31), which surround kings who live in palaces.
3. The dream generally speaks of the concerns which your heart is
currently facing. So ask, “What issues was I processing the day before
I had the dream?”
For example, Paul was wondering where to go next on his
missionary journey and had a dream of a Macedonian man
motioning for him to come on over (see Acts 16:6-11).
Nebuchadnezzar was thinking his kingdom would go on forever
(see Dan. 4:28-33) and he had a dream of a tree being chopped
off at the roots (see Dan. 4:9-27). Once you know the thoughts
that were on the dreamer’s heart when he fell asleep, it is much
easier to draw out the meaning of the dream.
4. The meaning of the dream must be drawn from the dreamer.
Realize you know nothing about the dream, but through
dependence upon the Holy Spirit and the skillful use of questions
you can draw the meaning of the dream out from the heart of the
dreamer.
As for these four young men, God gave them knowledge and skill

in all literature and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all
visions and dreams (Daniel 1:17).
A plan in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of
understanding draws it out (Proverbs 20:5 NASB).
5. The dreamer’s heart will leap and “witness” and say, “Aha!” when
it hears the right interpretation, so never accept an interpretation that
does not bear witness in the dreamer’s heart.
6. Dreams reveal but do not condemn.
Their goal is to preserve life, not to destroy it (see Job 33:13-18).
7. Never make a major decision in your life based only on a dream
without receiving additional confirmation from the other ways that
God speaks to us and guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of
others, illumined Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy,
anointed reasoning, etc.).

REVISIT YOUR SEVEN-DAY DREAM JOURNAL
GO BACK TO YOUR SEVEN DAYS OF RECORDED DREAMS. BEGIN to work through each
dream using the following seven principles for dream interpretation. These are
extremely basic and foundational. They will take you to a certain level, but we
strongly encourage you to seek out other resources for a more detailed and
exhaustive approach to dream interpretation.
Remember, this is simply an introduction to hearing God through your
dreams. The goal here is not necessarily interpretation; rather, it is to get you
into a habit of constantly paying attention to the dreams you have and
understand that God is speaking to you through your dreams.
For this section, I encourage you to take each dream through the seven-step
process in the pages ahead.

DREAM FROM DAY ONE
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY TWO
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY THREE
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY FOUR
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY FIVE
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY SIX
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM FROM DAY SEVEN
1. Identify symbols in your dream (remember to see it from a
symbolic perspective).

2. Because the symbols come from your life, ask yourself, “What does
this symbol mean to me?”

3. Ask yourself, “What issue was I processing the day before I had the
dream?” Write it down.

4. Ask the Holy Spirit to help you understand the meaning of your
dream. Write down some ideas of what you think the dream might
mean.

5. Identify how your heart bears witness to the different interpretation
options.

6. What do you believe the dream is revealing? (Remember, dreams
reveal; they don’t condemn.)
7. Seek additional confirmation. If you believe you have received
clarity on a dream, be sure to submit to several sources for
review/evaluation first between acting upon it. Remember, never make
a major decision in your life based only on a dream without receiving
additional confirmation from the other ways that God speaks to us and
guides us (peace in our hearts, the counsel of others, illumined
Scriptures, God’s still small voice, prophecy, anointed reasoning, etc.).

DREAM JOURNAL
ONCE YOU HAVE FINISHED GOING THROUGH THIS BOOK, I RECOMMEND that you
purchase an exclusive notebook for writing down and recording your dreams. If
you want to explore dreams further, please visit our website
(www.cwgministries.org) for books, DVDs, and free online videos available on
Hearing God through Your Dreams.
In the meantime, we are going to provide you with several pages of lined
writing space for recording them.

ABOUT MARK AND PATTI VIRKLER
Mark Virkler, Ph.D. and Patti Virkler, D.Min. have co-authored more than 50
books in the areas of hearing God’s voice and spiritual growth. They are the
founders of Communion with God Ministries and Christian Leadership
University, where the voice of God is at the center of every learning experience.
Mark has taught on developing intimacy with God and spiritual healing for more
than 30 years on six continents. The message has been translated into over 40
languages, and he has helped to establish more than 250 church-centered Bible
schools around the world.

MINISTRY INFORMATION
You may feel led to host Mark Virkler in your community for a weekend
seminar on “How to Hear God’s Voice.” Details can be found at:
www.cwgministries.org/seminars
Mark and Patti Virkler have written 60 books demonstrating how to take God’s
voice into area after area of life. These are available at:
www.cwgministries.org/catalog
They have also developed over 100 college courses for Christian Leadership
University that put the voice of God in the center of your learning experience.
These classes can all be taken from your home. View our complete catalog
online at: www.cluonline.com
Would you allow the Virklers to recommend a coach to guide you in applying
God’s voice in every area of your life? Information about their Personal Spiritual
Trainer program is available at: www.cwgministries.org/pst
We invite you to become a certified facilitator of this course and teach others to
hear God’s voice! Find out the details at:
www.cwgministries.org/certified
Share your journaling, dreams and visions with others who have experienced this
training! Healing rooms, prayer counseling rooms and dream interpretation
discussion threads are also available. Thousands are gathering to share their lives
at:
www.KoinoniaNetwork.org

Table of Contents
Cover
Halftitle
Destiny Image Books by Mark and Patti Virkler
Title
Copyright
Contents
Introduction
Section One: Four Keys to Hearing God’s Voice
My Sheep Really Do Hear My Voice!
Key #1
Key #2
Key #3
Key #4
Section Two: Meditate on God’s Voice
Your Next Step in Hearing God
Part One: Four Pillars of Biblical Meditation
Part Two: Seven-step Meditation Process
Meditation Journal
Section Three: Hearing God through Your Dreams
Why Are Dreams Important to Us Today?
Seven Reasons We Should Listen to Our Dreams
Dream Dedication
Your Seven-day Dream Journal
Seven Foundational Principles for Dream Interpretation
Revisit Your Seven-day Dream Journal
Dream Journal
About Mark and Patti Virkler
Ministry Information

