CONTENTS

CHAPTER

PAGE

1. The Fire Sermon

Dwight Lyman Moody (1837 -1899)

7

2. Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God
Jonathan Edwards (1703 - 1758)

19

3. The Most Wonderful Sentence Ever Written
Reuben Archer Torrey (1856 - 1928)

43

4. God's Love to Fallen Man
John Wesley (1703 - 1791)

63

5. Repentance
George Whitefield (1714 - 1770)

79

6. Fury N at in God
Thomas Chalmers (1780 - 1847)

103

7. Accidents, Not Punishments
Charles Haddon Spurgeon (1834 - 1891)

127

8. A Living Stone
Handley C.G. Maule (1841 - 1920)

151

THE FIRE SERMON
Dwight Lyman Moody
(1837-1899)

On Sunday night, October 8, 1871, Dwight L.
Moody was preaching to a large congregation in
Farwell Hall in Chicago. It was the fifth of a series
of six sermons on the life of Christ. He proposed to
preach the sixth and the last of the series on the
following Sunday. The courthouse bell was sounding an alarm of fire, but he paid no attention to it.
The people were accustomed to hearing the fire
bell, and it did not disturb them much when it
sounded. He finished his sermon on "What Shall I
Do with Jesus?" and said to the audience:
"Now, I want you to take the question with you
and think it over, and next Sunday I want you to
come back and tell me what you are going to do
with Him."
In a short time that congregation was a crowd of
wildly fleeing fugitives, and their homes and Farwell
Hall were heaps of smoking ruins.
Twenty-two years later Chicago celebrated the
anniversary of that fire on a large scale, hoping to
draw the largest number of people to the World's
Fair by having a "Chicago Day." Mr. Moody
resolved to take advantage of the circumstances to

7

Dwight Lyman Moody
make October 8, 1893, a great day for the cause of
Jesus Christ. Arrangements were made for an extraordinary meeting in the central Music Hall running
from 10:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. One part of the service
was to be a repetition by Mr. Moody of the sermon
he had preached on the night of the fire twenty-two
years before.
The hall was filled, with hundreds of disappointed
people outside vainly trying to gain entrance. The
meeting went on uninterrupted for the four and
one-half hours, closing with Mr. Moody's sermon
the last half hour.

THE FIRE SERMON

IN THE SPRING OF '71, along with Philip Phillips

and Reverend (now Bishop) J. H. Vincent, I went
to California, and when I came back to Chicago hot
weather had come, and our audience had become
scattered. I came to Farwell Hall, wanting to get
back the audience, but nearly all had gone, and it
seemed almost impossible to get them together
again. I remember that for a number of weeks I
was turning over in my mind what to do to accomplish that. I thought I would plan some kind of
sacred concerts or get someone to lecture on historical events, for I thought that the gospel would not
draw.
But I remember that after praying over it and
getting up from my knees the thought came to me,
Preach to them on Bible characters. Well, I had

8

The Fire Sermon
some six or eight Bible characters in mind, and I
thought I would try Adam first. So I took Adam
and looked him over, but I thought I could never
talk about him for thirty minutes. Then I thought I
would try Enoch. I think I took up Noah next, and I
came to Abraham and had him as one of the characters. I advertised that I would speak so many
nights on the Bible characters. It was not long
before Farwell Hall began to fill up, and in five
weeks I had the largest congregations I had ever
spoken to in Chicago.
I intended to devote six nights to Christ's life. I
had spent four Sunday nights on the subject, and
had followed Him from the manger along through
His life to His arrest and trial, and on the fifth Sunday night, October 8, I was preaching to the largest
congregation I had ever had in Chicago, quite elated
with my success. My text was,"What shall I do then
with Jesus which is called the Christ?" That night I
made one of the greatest mistakes of my life. After
preaching-or talking, as I did not call it preaching
then-with all the power that God had given me,
urging Christ upon the people, I closed the sermon
and said, "I wish you would take this text home
with you and turn it over in your minds during the
week, and next Sunday we will come to Calvary
and the cross, and we will decide what we will do
with Jesus of Nazareth."
I have never seen that congregation since. I have
hard work to keep back the tears today. I have
looked over this audience, and not a single one is
here that I preached to that night. I have a great
many old friends and am pretty well acquainted in
Chicago, but twenty-two years have passed away,
and I have not seen that congregation since, and I

9

Dwight Lyman Moody
will never meet those people again until I meet
them in another world. But I want to tell you one
lesson I learned that night, which I have never
forgotten, and that is, when I preach to press Christ
upon the people then and there, I try to bring them
to a decision on the spot. I would rather have that
right hand cut off than give an audience a week to
decide what to do with Jesus.
I have often been criticized, and people have
said: "Moody, you seem to try to get people to
decide all at once. Why do you not give them time
to consider?" I have asked God many times to
forgive me for telling people that night to take a
week to think it over, and if He spares my life I will
never do it again. This audience will break up in a
few moments, and we will never meet again. There
is something awfully solemn about a congregation
like thisl
You will notice that Pilate was just in the condition that my audience was that night, just the condition that you are in here today-he had to decide
then and there what to do with Jesus. The thing was
sprung upon him suddenly, although I do not think
that Jesus Christ could have been a stranger to
Pilate. I do not believe that He had preached in
Judea for months, and also in Jerusalem, without
Pilate hearing of His teaching. He must have heard
of the sermons He had preached; he must have
heard of the doctrines He taught; he must have
heard of the wonderful parables that He uttered; he
must have heard about the wonderful miracles that
He had performed; he must have heard how Herod
had taken the life of His forerunner by having him
beheaded, and of the cruel way he had treated
Him, so that he was no stranger to Jesus of Nazareth.

10

The Fire Sermon
But 1 do not believe that there is a child here
today that has not a better knowledge of Christ
than Pilate had. We have had more than eighteen
hundred years of gospel proclamation in this dark
world and have seen the fruits of Christianity as
Pilate never did. He never had seen Christ in His
glorified state. The only time he saw Him was in
His humiliation, despised and rejected of men. The
chief men that followed Christ were men of no
account, men of no power, of no title, of no influence, of no position or culture. There was no crown
on His brow except the crown of thorns, no scepter
in His hand except the reed placed there in derision
and mockery.
But we have seen Christ glorified, and we see
Him today by the throne of God. We have far more
light than Pilate had, and yet Pilate had his day; and
1 believe every man and woman have their day of
opportunity. That was Pilate's day. The Son of God
crossed his path that day, and he was exalted to
Heaven with privilege. It was a glorious privilege
that he had. If he had decided according to his own
conscience, even according to his own deceitful
heart, and had been influenced by his wife, Pilate
might have been immortal. He might have had his
name associated with that of Joseph of Arimathea,
with the twelve disciples of the Lamb, and with
those foremost to herald the name of Jesus, if he
had only acted according to his conscience. But
there was another influence about him. The world
came in; political preferment came in; the Roman
government came in, and he wanted to win the
favor of the Caesars. There you see that weak,
vacillating man in the balance, wavering. Hear his
decision: "I find no fault in him."
11

Dwight Lyman Moody
Did you ever notice that God makes all His
enemies testify that Jesus is the Son of God? The
centurion who had charge of His execution smote
his breast and said: "Certainly this was a righteous
man." And Judas, after having betrayed the Son of
God, said: "I have betrayed innocent blood." And
Pilate had to testify that he could find no fault in
Him.
I do not believe that ever in the history of the
world was there a more unjust judgment given than
that of Pilate on Jesus Christ. After examination he
declared, "I find no fault in this man," and in the
same breath he said, "I will chastise Him."
The process of scourging was very cruel. They
took the prisoner, bound his wrists, and fastened
him in a stooping posture, and the scourge, which is
made of cord knotted with sharp pieces of steel,
was brought down upon the bare back of the victim, lacerating the flesh, cutting it to the bone, and
many a man died under the infliction.
Pilate scourged an innocent Man, but he wanted
to curry favor with the Jews and also hold with the
Romans, and that was his decision. The Jews had
the judge. They saw he was vacillating and knew he
was the man for them, and that they could get their
own way. They said: "If you let that man go you
are not Caesar's friend." Then he tried to shift the
responsibility. What man is there here who has not
tried to shift responsibility in the same way? And I
tell you that everyone of you will have to decide
for himself what he will do with Jesus. Your wife
cannot decide it for you; no friend on earth can
decide for you.
It was the custom to release a prisoner at the feast
of the Passover, so Pilate took the most noted

12

The Fire Sermon
criminal he had and asked the people whether he
should release Barabbas or Christ. He thought they
would rather have Christ than Barabbas, but they
cried out: "Barabbas! Barabbas!" Then Pilate asked:
"What shall I do then with Jesus, who is called the
Christ?" He had sent Him to Herod, but Herod had
sent Him back and refused to take His life. And
when Pilate found that he could not prevail, he was
willing to go with the multitude instead of standing
up against the current.
What we want in this city is men to stand up for
the right; and even if you do suffer for a little while,
the crowning day is coming. We want men to stand
up against the current, not go with it, and not only
to stand up against the current, but to go right
against it. There was Pilate's failure.
Hardly any name in history shines brighter than
that of Joseph of Arimathea. I can imagine him that
night in the council chamber when Jesus was condemned by the Sanhedrin. "What think ye?" is the
question. And then it rang out through the judgment
hall, "He is guilty of death!" But away down at the
other end of the hall Joseph arose, and with a clear,
ringing voice he said: "I will never give my consent
to that just Man's death!" How that voice must have
refreshed the soul of the Son of God in that dark
night, when not one stood by Him, when all cried
out against Him! Dh, it is an honor to confess
Christ!
There never will be a time when we can do more
for Christ than now, and there is no better place
than here in Chicago. May God help us to take our
stand in these dark days when Christ is rejected by
so many and when they are telling us that He is not
the Savior of the world and are putting Him on a
13

Dwight Lyman Moody
level with other men. Come out and take a high
stand for Christ. Let others go on scoffing, but you
come out and identify yourself with the disciples
of Jesus Christ. Take a high stand-that is what we
want to do. May God help youl
Pilate had come to the fork in the road. That was
a memorable day in his history, for he had only to
take the advice of his wife and obey his conscience.
She had sent word to him, saying, "Have thou
nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered
many things this day in a dream because of him." It
may be that God warns you sometimes in dreams.
He evidently did warn Pilate through the dream of
his wife.
I was reading not long ago of a mother who had
a daughter who was away from home visiting with
friends. She dreamed that her daughter was murdered and buried under the barn floor. The dream
made such an impression on her that she had the
barn floor taken up, and there was the daughter just
as she had dreamed.
I do not know what Pilate's wife's dream was,
but perhaps she had a dream of the judgment day,
and saw Christ sitting upon a throne with the angels
about Him, and Pilate coming before Him to be
judged, and she was terrified and made haste and
sent word to her husband: "Have nothing to do
with that just man; for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream because of him." Every man
who had anything to do with the murder of Christ
soon came to a terrible end. Be careful about your
decision in regard to Jesus, for He is to be the judge
of the world.
I cannot detain you much longer, but I would like
today to press upon you this one question: "What
14

The Fire Sermon
shall I do with Jesus Christ?" I cannot speak for the
rest of you, but ever since that night of the great
fire I have determined as long as God spares my
life to make more of Christ than in the past. I thank
God that He is a thousand times more to me today
than He was twenty-two years ago ... I made some
vows after that Chicago fire, and I want to tell you
that God has helped me to keep those vows. I am
not what I wish I were, but I am a better man than
I was when Chicago was on fire.
As I was preparing to leave London the last time
I was there, I called on a celebrated physician who
told me my heart was weakening and that I had to
let up on my work, that I had to be more careful of
myself; and I was going home with the thought that
I would not work quite so hard.
I was on that ill-fated steamer the Spree when
the announcement came that the vessel was sinking
and that there was no hope. The stern had sunk
thirty feet, and we were there forty-eight hours in
that helpless condition. Noone on earth knew what
I passed through during those hours, as I thought
that my work was finished, that I would never
again have the privilege of preaching the gospel of
the Son of God. And on that dark night, the first
night of the accident, I made a vow that if God
would spare my life and bring me back to America,
I would come back to Chicago and at this W orId' s
Fair preach the gospel with all the power that He
would give me; and God has enabled me to keep
that vow during the past five months. It seems as if
I went to the very gates of heaven during those
forty-eight hours on the sinking ship, and God permitted me to come back and preach Christ a little
longer.

15

Dwight Lyman Moody
And I would like to say that if there is a man or
woman in this house today living under a broken
vow, you had better right here and now, in the
presence of these people, resolve to pay your vows
before God.
Sometimes we wait for a calamity to strike us.
When the Chicago fire struck me I was in middle
life-if I live out the time allotted to man. After the
first I just looked around, and I cannot tell you what
a blessing that fire was to me. I think when calamity
comes we ought to get all we can out of it, and if
God has a lesson for us to learn, let us take the lesson. It may be that God has a wonderful lesson for
us. I will venture to say that many of you here have
been in this same state. You that are in middle life,
look around and ask yourself whether your life is
what it ought to be. Come today for a little review,
and look down along the way from whence you
came. Do you not see some spot in your life where
you have made a vow and have not kept it? You
have said, "I will be a more consecrated man, or I
will be a Christian"; you have stood by the bedside
of a dying mother and have said, "I will meet you
in the better world."
Are you going to make good that promise? Why
not do so here, just at the close of this four-hour
meeting? Make up your minds that you will carry
out that vow. It may be I am talking to a father or
mother who has laid away a little child. When that
child was taken away you said: "I am going to live a
more consecrated life; I will not get rooted and
grounded in things below, but I will rather set my
affections on things above; I will make good my
vow."
It is only a little while, a few months, a few years,
16

The Fire Sermon
and we will all be gone. May God help us now to
pay our vows in the presence of all the people.
Come now, while I am speaking, and make a full,
complete, and unconditional surrender to God, and
say, "Here am I, Lord; take me and use me; let me
have the privilege of being a co-worker with Thee,"
and there will be a fire kindled here that will burn
into eternity. This hour, this minute, make up your
minds that you are going to be from this time forth
on the Lord's side. Go to your home, to your
church, and give a ringing testimony for the Son of
God. Go to work, do what you can for Christ, and
there will be grand days for this republic and a
blessed life for you here and hereafter.

With this closing appeal Moody turned to
God with a fervent prayer of thanksgiving,
consecration, supplication, and tearful intercession for the city and for the multitudes coming
to the fair. Then once more the people united
in singing, and were dismissed with benediction, to meet again no more until all the earth
shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

17

